This is Jocopontcast number 202 with echo Charles and me, a jocowilling. Good evening. Good evening.
On a bright and violent morning in the central Pacific, a dying marine with part of his face shot off
saved my life.
He was
purged to top the partially raised ramp of an LCVP. He was a big solidly built man with a gaping
gory hole where his eye should have been. Blood streaming from the wound.
Moments earlier, he had been standing in the water beside me at the bottom of the ramp,
waiting with the other wounded men for his turn to board. Another casualty in the battle for
Bayes, you island. I was dying. I'd been shot through the lower abdomen, hit as my unit
waited toward the shore to assault the island. Two men from my platoon hauled me back to the
LCVP and struggled to lift me into the boat. The marine with the ravaged face who had just
boarded. Now saw that they were having trouble with me. He reached down, grabbed me with
one hand and pulled me up and over the top of the ramp. Amazing. And so I didn't die. That too was
amazing. But not really all that significant in the grand scheme of things. That incident
is just a small scene in a very big picture. So an insignificant event like that. Can you
imagine being gut shot in waste deep water under heavy machine gunfire, barely making it
back to a landing craft, which is going to save you, being pulled into that landing craft by
another wounded marine and surviving? Can you imagine considering that series of events to be
insignificant? It's almost impossible to think that way. But that excerpt is from a book called
Faithful Warriors, written by Lieutenant Colonel Dean Ladd, who served as an enlisted
an officer in the Marine Corps in the Pacific Campaign in World War II. He participated
in the battles for Guadalcanal, Taroa, Sipan, and Tinian. Battles where tens of thousands
of Americans were wounded or killed as they fought against the fanatical Japanese imperial
war machine. And while it's impossible for us to understand what those men actually went through
and what those battles were like. This book does an amazing job of giving us a glimpse into
this savage part of war. And it is a complete honor to have the author of this book, Dean Ladd,
here to talk with us about his experiences. Colonel Ladd, welcome to the program. Thank you.
That's incredible. The things that you went through in this book has been, I could not put this
book down. And this book is just the picture that it paints of what you all went through in that
Pacific Campaign is it's unbelievable what you guys went through. It truly is.
So I guess if we're going to start, I always like to start. I always like to start at the start.
So for you, go into the book here. It says in early 1939, a boy from the next block came home
from overseas. And I was never the same become because of it. His name was Lee Preston.
And he was a corporal on leave from the Marine Corps. He showed up wearing his dress blues,
creating quite a stern or quiet, spoken neighborhood. Mostly I think the stir was in me. He
looks so sharp in that uniform and his manner the way he carried himself at once modest,
but utterly selfish. He got me thinking about myself and my future. I was only a couple years
younger than Lee, but it didn't seem that way. I was a senior in high school just a teenager,
still a kid and Lee, well, he was different now. He had changed. He had left home a boy and returned.
I'm a Marine, a warrior. A man. So the old Marine Corps recruiting process of just sending
Marines home on leave and their dress uniform worked on you, huh? It really did.
Ed, what did you know about the Marine Corps at that point in time?
I bring much. I was being approached by one of the old timers in the local Marine Corps
reserved, organized and they were trying to get me to join. This was an opportunity to find a
little bit from another source. What was going to be? What it was like? I was surprised later on thinking
about this at that time. The Marine Corps was only 20,000. A lot of people that they felt
forced them to be able to be selected to get in there actually. This is all in 1939 and long before
we even thought we were going to get in World War II. It wasn't until, not much longer after I joined
in 1939, that I went to a couple of weeks, just like the National Guard once a week,
and have to rail right down right close to where we were having this broadcast right now, right across
the road from us. Then I went to college, Warsaw State University, and had one year, one year of
college, and went to two encampments with the organizers or one that first one is Sandy Eagle,
the second one was to Brimerton. Then we got called active duty though in November of 1940.
That's not very long. It was just a year. That's a year before we got into the war.
Here we were called and went by two up train and we got about 300 of us at least, and ended up
with Sandy Eagle, and that was that was for an accampment. Then a year later in November 1940,
we were called in active duty. We thought we were going to be gone one year, but we were only
gone what we were going for total of five years. So where were you when Pearl Harbor happened?
When Pearl Harbor happened, we were in Sandy Eagle, and I was going through a Scott Sniper School,
and I had a place called Mission Valley. I don't know if you've been to Sandy Eagle lately,
but Mission Valley is now a mall. Isn't that amazing? That was nothing but a safe Russian
and a lot of rattlesnakes. So you're going through that Sniper School Pearl Harbor happens,
and what did they do? They immediately recall you, did they cancel your school? We all had returned
to the base and we get ready to go here, go there, there was just all kinds of commands going out.
First of all, hey, what to go here? No, no, we're going to go there and this, all of that.
And despite of all of that, within one month, well, by first part of January,
we were board of ship, heading to American Smaller, and to defend that island from the Japanese
taken over and blocking the supply line from nine states to New Zealand and Australia.
Now, did the Japanese ever show up? And attack that section of American Samo?
They didn't for a long time. They would have, if a handman for what's that mean,
island, and on the other hand, they'd be big battle midway. Midway. Midway. My age and middle
of the difficult recalling names anymore. It's all good. We got time. So at what point did you get
the next, the next orders that you are going to not just guard the silent anymore, you guys
were going to head out? Yeah, about a month before we find a left, we've been training the
Japanese young men who joined the join the Marine Corps reserve. And they took over the
guarding each of the little beaches all around the island, somewhere very remote. And so we're
able to leave and had no idea where we're going. We thought, well, it could be the East Indies,
who we had no idea. But on the other hand, we know it pretty much is going to be going to go out of
Kaneal because we were having difficulties there. And somewhere in here, you got your commission
becoming, and you became an officer. How did that happen? Okay, after we've been on
small for about three or four months, I was now a corporal at as a squad leader of a machine gun
like machine gun squad. And I got along very well with the NCOs and with our paternal
leader. And so I was recommended to go to a machine gun, it was built as a machine gun training
school. But it turned out it was just to identify likely candidates to become commissioned.
So I recognize there was probably about, uh, could have been 150 or more of us. And it lasted six
weeks. And here as a corporal, I was one of those selected to get a field commission.
And that's it. You had one year of college, they put, put you from corporal to
second lieutenant. To second lieutenant, and at that time we had no means of even getting
getting any second Lieutenant bars. It had, it made one down at the, where they were,
where they're, uh, aircraft were. So you guys just fashioned some, some butter bars for yourself.
Right, we did. And then, and then next next thing when matter of, and parts first fire, no
memory, this was only a month after I was commissioned. Uh, here we were bar ship heading to
Lord knows where and turned out to be Guadalcanale. And here I am entering combat with the same group
that I had been a list of it before the same company. And I know our first sergeant, he was a
griffle guy. And he used to read me all like a theater, everybody else. But he saw that any time
that I was giving a command that he said, you listen to your second lieutenant, you're going
to have to contend with me. So that was just, it was just wonderful. So I was an extra officer assigned
to the company headquarters. And that was pretty much the situation they had to have extra officers
when they got in the casually, they could immediately fill a fill the ranks with, with a new
pertune commander. And then that's a long story after, right, how I got into the actual
action of itself. Not knowing how I was going to be able to react as a, as a young lieutenant leader.
Well, you write about that here. Here, we'll go back to the book and here is you actually
heading into Guadalcanale. And here we go. I remember thinking as my LCVP chug toward the beach
that my time had come. And that it would be a time of testing when I would get to show what I was
made of at last. Even so, a part of me wished I were somewhere else. What if I failed the test?
Yeah. I was assigned to the headquarters section of B company first battalion as an extra
second lieutenant with no specific duties other than to follow whatever orders I was given,
and make myself useful in whatever possible way. The regiment was actually above full strength
with junior officers to spare. It was an unusual circumstance. And I knew it would suit,
soon change because junior officers typically suffer the highest casualties relative to the other
ranks. A Trishin would quickly and inevitably take its toll. Lutonants and command of line units
would get killed, wounded, injured, and sick. Extra is like me. Would replace them. Inevitably,
a few junior officers would be relieved for incompetence or cowardice. I prayed that I wouldn't
be one of them. That I wouldn't turn yellow and let my buddies down when the going got tough.
A fate worse than death. As for death itself, no worries there. Getting killed was something
that happened to the other guy. And then arrival, RLCVP's came to a gentle halt at the waterline,
nosing into the sand of beach red between the Teneru River and Lunga Point. We climbed over the
sides. There were no ramps on those early model of Higginboats, and we walked onto Guadalcanal.
We hardly got our trousers wet. We experienced rougher landings during amphibious assault
exercises outside San Diego. San Chamenie for one. So you're heading into Guadalcanal and there's
it's a pretty calm entry even though there had been a lot of fighting going on.
Yeah, previously they had been at that location.
So once you get on Guadalcanal, you start to move towards the front lines.
Yeah, in this case it was off of the opposite direction where the front lines were. The
Japanese had landed. We waste south of us and there was concern that they were going to come
in and develop us from that location. So our regiment moved out to Hedomoff and going through
jungle and at night. We didn't know where we were. We'd finally got up to an army up at
the 164th from the quotas. They had just ended up shooting each other just the day before.
Here we saw blood all over the place from that situation. We ended up at night and we just had to
stop right along a river bank and I had my feet dangling in the water at the time. So anyway,
we never did with the Japanese. They're all suddenly disappeared from that particular location.
But that was a try. Quite a try in time. Just what it's like to move into combat. Not
no one's going to happen next. You know one thing that I talk about a lot is the possibility
of friendly fire occurring. Yeah, exactly what happened. I know I had friendly fire incidents happen
with me in Iraq and this happened to you as well. I'm going to the book here. You've been moving
for a while and you're holding up at night and you guys are in your position then all of a sudden
bang someone yelled another shot fired. Yeah. And then another and then another several shots and
quick succession all from our foxholes. More shots all at once and just the whole company shooting,
firing every which way shooting and shouting grenades with their own bursting left and right,
front and to my rear explosions and muzzle blasts lift the area like popping flash bolts.
Corporal Lane was hitting the arm a minor wound but he didn't think that it was minor. He panicked
and shouted out to Sergeant Wimpy right. Top my my arm shot off. Since right and
Lane were best buddies. A show of concern from the first sergeant might have might in the circumstances
have been expected and when certainly have been warranted. But right and old salt, who is
crusty as they come was not practiced and showing concern even to best buddies who had been wounded
in combat. Muddering just loud enough to make himself heard above the racket. Right replied,
shut up you fool. You want to let them know where I am? The shooting continued. More grenades
exploded. PFC Harold Park, a bargarner with first platoon,
realized that several men just to his left were throwing grenades all around the darn place. The
guys were just having a little hang grenade war with each other. Maybe the Japanese were out there
too tossing a few grenades of their own but parked in think so. He stayed low and didn't fire his weapon.
I didn't figure would do any good even if they were Japanese. You couldn't see nothing.
All you could do is park was a half Korean and half I have Irish.
Yes sir. I had a lot of contact with them after the war as well.
So it was important for him to because I know you say in the book that that he inherited his
father's looks not as mothers. So he looked more Korean. We told him he'd better stay close.
Yeah that's a rough one. So you get done with this. This just happening basically all night.
I mean crazy fire fights and you don't even know if there's any Japanese.
Well that's time. My Murdoch Murdoch was acting a company commander at that time and
man near him got shot through the abdomen area and he's more concerned that he lost it
a lot of his private parts. What are you doing?
Now was Murdoch? Did Murdoch have experience from some of the other campaigns?
No he was just like the rest of us. We're all new to combat.
Speaking of near misses and whatnot, you're waiting to do a link up and here we go back to the book.
I thought I might grab a quick bite to eat and start to open my sea ration can.
In the process I somehow managed to cut my thumb to the bone. Blood gust from the wound and I
spent some frantic moments applying a field dressing to stomp the flow. The noncombs and enlisted men
watched me probably trying hard not to laugh at me. I still have a scar right there and that's
thumb from that. And they're watching their thinking second lieutenant's are idiots. Hard to
argue with that assessment which the lower ranks held as virtually at axiomatic. And I just given
them another reason for their certified how humiliating and annoying the cut would not fully heal as long
as I remain on Guadalcanal and I still bear a scar from it. Thus far the chief dangers in Guadalcanal
posed to my well being it come from one my buddies via friendly fire and two myself. The
Japanese in comparison had been a relatively benign presence. There are a couple of situations right
at that same time that happened. One was a young marine from another outfit. He was a real bad
he thought he was he's really good there. He says I'm used to all this stuff. And here he had a
Japanese skull hanging from a from a court of some sort and he was just swinging that around crazy.
Then a little bit later within within an hour or so we had a big air rain just hundreds of
Japanese planes dropped drop bombs on us. And then I was watching one of our an aircraft cruise
cruiseers shooting at him and many of their planes dropped at that time. But that was that was really
a really getting into it in deep way but not really directly in direct wire at the time.
So that time that kid that you talk about and you mentioned in the book this is sort of the
so he's a guy that had been fighting somewhere else and he comes back and so this is the first
person that you see that you look at that's starting to be you know he's having some let's see how
did you put it he had acclimated to conditions on Guadalcanal that's what you wrote and you know
however long that takes before you know it's a different it's a different it's a different environment
it's a completely different mindset and that's what he was doing. Now these all these young people
they all had beers now you know they haven't shaved for a long time and they they had the
hand hand up food really the reading Japanese rice and whatnot because our transfers all had to
leave they loaded off the troops but most of the mature all of the food stuff they were able
to unload so they had eat this Japanese food so anyway they were pretty good looking people
but even so they were full of they were full of full of fight you could tell young people and
you know young guys that are in their teens still you know you get into this
uh...
motton account and i say that right the motton account metan account yeah
metan account uh... this this river
this offensive that you guys start on ten november which is the hundred sixty seven
anniversary of the founding of the Marine Corps and here we go to the book separating
our forces from their geographical objective of coastal village with some four miles of
of exceptionally rugged terrain grassy ridges falling away steeply to jungle choke ravines
in several thousand japanese infantry men also exceptionally rugged
our mission objective was to engage defeat and destroy the enemy formations in our path
our assault units advanced solely but steadily against the term in resistance the eighth
marines ordered to move up in column behind the two seven filed across a narrow pontoon bridge
over the motton account metan account and continue to short distance before halting for new
in child as before the sweep to call the point we encountered no japanese the attacking
units are driven them off but we suffered casualties just the same
that's it's been a bit about there we were we had the child uh... there were many japanese
bodies lying about some had been partially buried some of the eggs are still sticking
up uh... there been a major battle between between them attacking
the other rains that have been there just before we were weeks before
and here all these mung all these bodies and flies and maggots everything was
so we ate among all of that
yeah your sense of some some guys would
could couldn't even carry on barely because it smelled so bad yeah yeah yeah
this right near a place called point crews by the way and today it is a city well
of over twenty thousand that's the capital of the of the cell of solman islands
at this point you actually say in the book as you were sitting there amongst all these
bodies these dead bodies and as you're sitting there eating your child
you say like that kid twirling the skull i was acclimating to the conditions on
guadal canal i'd been on the island for seven days
so that's an indication to you
so then you guys later that day and enemy unit penetrator online and ambush weapons
patoon killing three marines with a burst of enemy fire with with a burst of machine gun fire
and then the entire offensive had suddenly been called off
and not only that we're gonna give up the ground we had taken relinquishing it to the
japanese what the hell we thought
so you get told hey you guys stop attacking
the reason was which you'll get into in this a bit
is that there's a major task force the japanese
but twelve transfers full of troops can you imagine
and uh... battleship and cruisers and lot of destroyers
and they they were gonna they were gonna just
knock us off of there
we had we had we didn't have a good feel that it was that dire but boy it
turned out it was because that
and when they did come in at night we saw him come in the mid-no-fammer
and uh... major battle between the naval battle called the naval battle called al canal
and uh... you never know watching at night time you didn't know
who's your our ships and which are theirs all sent you see something blow up
you see red hot shells being fired going back and criss-crossing fact
back and forth and then the next
next morning
he was they have had troops have the uh...
some are men that there there's their own ships were sunk
and now they they're all full of oil and they're
coming up there could now they're landing on our shore
it was uh... what and here we used
watching from a grandstand
viewpoint on a ridge watching all this happen
and incredible did you did you know that
this naval battle was about to take place
didn't know it's gonna be anything like that
imagine
roughly twelve transports full of troops
all but all but three of them were sunk
and the three that did beech
the troops got off but all their supplies and stuff
remained on
and and we have
our planes
bomb bomb that and try our church
so we had those we we had to reckon
with those troops that came we got off of those transports
and the next or the next week or so
your your description of this battle
yeah
is
is crazy to read i'm gonna read it
the battle between the american and japanese surface fleets began a little before
zero to two hundred like a suddenly breaking storm of
cataclysmic size and power
in the language of naval tacticians
the coming together of two fleets in sea-large channel
constituted what is known as a meeting
engage in engagement
but collision engagement is a better term
for describing what happened steaming more
or less blindly into the channel of fleets ran into each other at
oblique angles
their ships quickly became intermingled resulting in
a close quarters melee that saw the combatants charging
madly about their big guns flashing and booming hurling red hot
shells and high flaming arcs above the channel
the thunder of the guns rolled across the black water
a steady pulsating roar and the molten projectile
streak leg meteors crisscrossing the skies with fiery
tails rising and falling and crashing into ships and exploding in massive fireballs
violent secondary explosions caused by ammunition cooking off in the intense heat
of the detonating shells rock some of the ships and sent them
furiously ablaze
blurning like roman candles
fountains of fire sparking and shooting flames and blasting big chunks of steel
in every direction all the while star shells and flares burst high above the
channel and invaded like dying galaxies as they drifted down at the end of their
parachutes into the extinguishing water
the canisters that held the flares periodically flew over our positions
charging like locomotives search lights probe the dirt lower darkness
with their long brilliant beams sweeping back and forth above the surface
by secting fixing on some hapless ship bringing the blazing shells down on it
streams of tracers from automatic cannons and machine guns
curved through the middle of the air every now and then an
airant torpedo slammed into the beach below us
2500 pounds of explosives blasting a big crater at the waterline
we watched all this from our foxes on the ridge front row seats to
a spectacle that john murder john mordocla likened to all the fourth of
July's I ever saw my life all put together at once
we were a vocal audience awestruck and profane a ship would explode
and all up and down the line you'd hear men exclaiming
cheese a surprise and holy shit and oh my fucking god did you see that
it was thrilling really you couldn't help but feel that way but i also couldn't
help at wondering which ships were ours and how we could dis- and how they could
distinguish friend from foe i thought of the many men who were losing their
young lives right before our eyes i felt very fortunate to be in safe in my
foxhole and i wondered who's winning yeah we had no idea who was winning
yeah just we just knew that what i we had seen a massive combat
just incredible and we were at a ring side seat
now as that's going on obviously you have to realize that if the americans don't
win this thing yeah that was it you guys are done yeah yeah
can you imagine a convoy like that that many transports
they they probably matched our numbers at that time if they had got all gotten
a shore but they didn't yeah
early the next morning be company crossed the river to spearhead the attack by
another green army battalion the one the first the 182nd along the coastal flat
toward the base of point crews so you guys you guys took lead yeah we were
we were spearheading that particular attack you know you talk about you
you mentioned to win be right a little earlier and that's a heck of a nick name
then doesn't sound like it's easy for a couple and thought about that true
but but we talk about you know a lot of times we talk about leadership on this podcast
and you do a great description of this kind of transition and the relationship that you had
with wimpy right i think it's worse well this is this is my co-author Steve
wine gardener tell you he was he's a he's a great you know he got a award for a
police woman that that escaped the holy cost okay
call lala story well we can definitely look into that book yeah oh yeah
here's how he describes your relationship with him wimpy right was the company's first
sergeant he was a tough old salt shorten stocky late 30s or 40s old enough to be my
father old enough for that matted matter to be the father of quite a few of the
loutenates in the regiment he was going on 20 years in the Marine Corps and it's
served in china nicaragua and Haiti he was no new comber to war no stranger to combat
he was also in our terms he possessed a commanding voice which he used in a full
throated bellow when reading off one of his charges when reading off one of his charges
for doing something stupid on sumo before i was commissioned i had been one of his charges
and it usually more than once deservedly been on the receiving end of one of his
herangs but now i outranked him i was at first uncomfortable with our new relationship
i found it hard to imagine giving orders to a man who not so long ago had been
shouting in my face and giving me a dressing down the likes of which i'd never
experienced before and never would again it wasn't that i was afraid of him rather i
respected him too much and knew him and knew too well that he was a great marine to think that
i could or should be telling what to do and i thought that he might resent my status
and just to be cantankerous make things difficult for me i need never worried about right
a consummate professional he supported me fully and ceseerly sincerely i should have expected
that after all it was because of his recommendation that i received my commission he looked
on me as his protege and he wanted me to succeed in part because my success would reflect well on
him but mainly because he was generally genuinely proud of me also because i was a known quantity
whom he had personally mentored he much preferred me to be giving orders rather than some 90
day wonder fresh out of training in the states since he had taught me everything i knew he was
confident that in combat together we would more or less be thinking along the same lines and
important connection for a top sergeant to have with his petoon leader nor did he know what he
broke the slightest in subordination toward me from anyone else in the petoon you obey your lieutenant
or you'll have to answer to me he growled at my guys and you could be damn sure they did nobody
wanted to have to answer to right sounds like an outstanding marine i'm pretty soon you're going
again me getting into a part is my my first encounter of very close calls was losing my life
on hill 78 second platoon was dealing with a lone sniper who had fired on us from the open
trees on the coastal flap of below he was high up in one of those trees high enough to place
my little above the hilltop allowing him to shoot down to us at a shallow angle he pottered us
pottered us for a better part of four hours and then by the buy and buy and much to my astonishment
a lieutenant i didn't recognize came strolling along in the ridge fully upright fully exposed
this sniper smirking at us i was lying on the belly on my belly in the grass and he approached me
saying i would be worried about that sniper can't hit me one in the next instant a shot rang out
and a bullet wing disarm can't get complacent uh you continue on i didn't much care where that
lieutenant won or what happened to him i wanted to get that sniper i pulled out my field glasses
and scan the trees below our position as luck would have it i spotted the sniper almost at once that
is i spotted his pude wrapped legs and booted feet dangling from the limb of a huge banyan
tree about 150 yards from my position i lifted the field glasses a notch to the clump of
leaves where those above those legs i couldn't see him but he had to be there japanese legs
were always attached to japanese bodies just then he took a shot at me he must have seen me looking
maybe my field glasses glinting the sun and give me a way his bullet hit the ground just
inches from my nose sprang dirt my face i dropped my field glasses and snatched up my spring field
firing from the prone position i unloaded the entire clip at the clump of leaves above his feet
five shots one after the other working the bolt quickly put smooth me but smoothly so it's
not spoiled my aim just as i had been taught to do and just as i had practiced on the Marine
Coriful ranges i didn't think about it i didn't have to think all that training just kicked right
in and i killed the man who had been trying to kill me he didn't drop from the tree he didn't
drop his rifle but that was to be expected japanese snipers customarily tied themselves and the
rifles to the trees bottom line he didn't shoot at us after that he was dead all right the first man i
had killed yes that's my first my first call the first call the first call of life having around hit
right front of your face i'm not gonna dirt my face oh he he spotted me i was no longer somebody
to harass i was somebody it was gonna kill him now we had a dog a dog going on all right
the eighth Marines first and second battians were to advance by side in columns in tourvine
then attack and capture hill 83 ridge line the first battalion was to move forward on the right
be company would lead in the battians advance and my platoon would lead the company's advance
so that you put you does that put your company right your your company right at the front
yeah that you're pulled to and right at the front of the company and we were at that time we
we were right and red in the crux of it following it our an artillery bombardment second
platoon with the rest of the battalion behind it passed through the army lines and advanced into the
ravine enemy machine guns and riflemen fired down on us from concealed positions on the ridge
some 75 yards ahead and above us machine guns chattered rut relentlessly ripping through the jungle
rustling foliage clipping branches and leaves corporal Olson de Moss and his squad led the way moving
up out of the ravine and onto the ridge suddenly a voice shouted baker company get off the
ridge huh i looked around at my man who gave that order most of my men had gone to ground hiding
in the bush as and were invisible to the Japanese that's the nature of jungle warfare everyone tries
to stay hidden you can hardly see anyone either enemy or friendly the battlefield seems empty
and you feel and you can feel alone and isolated on it especially when you're in command especially
when in the middle of a firefight and when somebody else starts giving orders to your men
I looked around and a few of the men I could see stared back at me there there are
ex-blank expressions a firm denial it wasn't me a few minutes later de Moss and his squad
returned to the ravine having relinquished their brief hold on the ridge top somebody although
us to get off de Moss explained he thought one of our guys had given the order then we both
realized what had happened those clever Japanese one of them someone flutten American English had given
that order very clever he must be pleased with himself he must be laughing at us just about now
him and his men laughing and how did he know that we were baker company you heard us heard
us say that that's it now we're going to get a little bit a little bit later than this now I take
over the puttoon second puttoon they puttoon later was yellow he wouldn't he wouldn't get
up out of his hole so now I'm in charge and you're going to get into what the close calls I had
there are boy they were they were mighty close unbelievable I don't know how I survived it
yeah going back to this we risen to our uphill attack and we were met with more devastating
machine gun and rifle fire so would you say this this engagement right here is the first time
that you were under real oh yeah okay yeah other than getting bombed other than having
area of attack other than it's not for shooting this this was it this is it is about a closest
close to a call in second be I tell you we kept going for going forward firing on the move leaning
slightly into the incline shooting from the shoulder and hip firing blindly at the top of the ridge
we couldn't see the enemy but we knew he was up there dimos on my left banged away with his
springfield just as fast as he could work the bolt and that his rifle seeves seized up dimos
looked at me and I looked at him and the spell was broken just like just that fast I came out
of my battle trance I felt very exposed and insecure judging by the wide eyed look he gave me
dimos felt the same dimos inspectors rifle discovered that he had a bullet had pierced his magazine
barely missing the nose his nose in the process he never cursed never uttered profanities and now
true to form his big eyes still as saucers his eyes still as big as saucers he exclaimed
well I'll be a dirty name then he discarded his rifle and started throwing grenades at the top of the
ridge the reality of our sudden harrowing plight then struck me this was my first major combat
test as a platoon leader and I realized that I had to take immediate and firm control of myself
I could not show fear in front of my men a couple feet to my right private McCoy Reynolds had
been hurling grenades one after the other each time courageously standing up and exposing himself
to enemy fire he crouched down next to me and scanned the top of the ridge then he exclaimed I see
them and threw another grenade in the next instant he was shot through the neck killed instantly
he fell at my feet for a moment I just looked at him his eyes wide open lifeless stared back at me
then I realized that now more than ever I had to get a grip on things and seize control
of what was becoming an increasingly chaotic situation I decided at once we needed support from our
mortars and backed a little way down the ridge out of the field of fire to further assess the situation
now at the same time we were running low on an ammunition as well and we sent back call we need
more ammunition next thing we know bandaliar after bandaliar of ammunition started arriving
just the same as same Guided guys now that's an interesting I mean you recognized
that that you needed to get control of your emotions
is that something you would thought about what made you realize that what made you realize oh wow
I better do something because I'm in charge and I need to make some decisions here I don't I don't
know all of a sudden fear went away I guess I didn't have fear right at that time
and it's also interesting but I saw the dire situation here we were in a situation that
we we had we we were committed and either to keep going or are we gonna back up then back off
finally we were called back down and now knowing that that that's the same kind of movement
went clear to the top and decided to just call off that drive in general here I was at the
I was at the spares head right there it was called off and they just said that the general
from the top on down was that okay we stopped going after him and losing troops and that's just
let him try in the vine well yeah because at this point you had we controlled we controlled
all the ways we controlled this up we had taken out their supplies so let's do some siege warfare
and make them wait yeah make them star so wait we had no more fighting we had a firm
the fans line along a ridge for a month just just held a line continue with these setting up
reconnaissance patrols next year you know are they doing what they were doing and I led
Denver reconnaissance patrol myself taking out four or five men with me and finding out where they were
that was scary situation to all these reconnaissance patrols you know right before they before they
stopped that as you're still pushing forward up that ridge you got some great detail in here that's
absolutely worth talking about going to the book here the ammunition was quickly distributed so
you called for ammunition the ammunition was quickly distributed and once again we moved up hill
shooting as we went another of my man men private Walter Cuss was favorally hit while scouting up the
ridge from a different direction at the moment of his death he exailed the his last breath
and that out a long rising how of pain and anguish like a dying animal yeah didn't sound like
human being several attempts were made to reach him and dragon back all on successful
PFC James Bell said I'm going up there all bring him down he was often running before anyone could
stop him yeah on his own he did that and he was shot through the chest well before reaching Cuss's body
we were able to retrieve Bell and he was still alive as we cared him down and out of a line of fire
but he was just about gone he had a sucking chest wound that made it increasingly difficult to breathe
hoping about size he couldn't breathe you see
this was the first time I had seen such a wound and it was a terrible sight our corpsman tried
to patch him up but there was little he could do a sucking chest wound needs to be sealed internally
as well as externally and the corpsman could only treat the outside finally Bell said it looks like
this is goodbye and then he calmly died just like in the movies I thought with his last words and
everything yeah soon after that we quit attacking and withdrew we couldn't dislodge the enemy from the
ridge we had been defeated our losses were heavy my Patuna loan suffered seven casualties four
killed Reynolds Bell Cuss and private Robert Cuss three wounded PFC James Harris
private burnt Mick Bernie and private named Mandraville total casualties for first
Patallian were nine killed and 23 wounded overall in the period spanning 18 to 23
November the 8th Marines lost 42 men killed and many more wounded now do I you got in the
part where a discurory escort was named after Mickoy Reynolds oh I did not know that well let me tell
you about that yeah my company commander had been a journalist with a with a anorland's paper
so he's good at writing up things so I recommended recommended something written up on him he wrote
this up in such a matter that a destroyer escort was named after him that's called in McOed Reynolds
and it in turn sank to Japanese submarines later on yeah and was that um was that captain LeBlanc
that you're talking about yes it is so so captain LeBlanc was your company commander at that time
and it sounds like it sounds like from the book well let me give you your your thoughts on him
we called him little Napoleon he was notoriously eager to make a name for himself and just as
notorious not just as notoriously a verse to taking risks his men took the risks and he took the
credit for their success he would say come on we've got a tough job to do and then he decides
someone else to do it sometimes he denounced that we were going on an out on a reconnaissance
platoon and then he turned a Murdoch or me or one of the other junior officers and say hey how about
you leading it and at one point he tells you to go back to the go back to the army this is
a secret is darn thing you can imagine you're reading now he he's telling you to go back to the
army and tell them what you know what the ethical proposition and they ran into the same
stuff that we did or and they really ran into it really bad so he tells you to go and this is
what you this is what you write I come all across the ridges east facing slope walking in the
grass at the edge of the jungle I was beneath the crests and felt reasonably safe the area was
deserted a true nomans land I found this very disconserting it was eerie so you're alone
I'm stupid stupid then I came upon the body of an American soldier he lay slightly above me
and to my right a stride a narrow trail leading to the top rich his abdomen had been torn open
and his intestines had spilled out and were spread across the ground a grizzly and heart-rending
sight I heard past him thinking I wonder what his dreams were will that happen to me now he was
looking at a photograph do you talk about that there no okay he's now he the last thing
for a died he's looking at a photograph of his family or his girlfriend is laid out there that's
the last the last as dying as he's dying he was looking at that and you're thinking I wonder what
his next would have been me that could be me will that happen to me well that happened yet because
there's you still have a lot of danger here there's still snipers out there shooting at me at this time
and now you go I arrived at the army cp to find it in turmoil and anxious captain and is
visibly agitated staff stood around a field radio listening to a report from the front line emanating
from the speaker where the sounds of battle mix with the crackling of static a frightened voice crying
out we're taking a lot of fire put two liter hit leg blown off get us out of here
I could hear the actual sounds of the battle outside not too far away machine guns rifle fire
grenades mortars the usual mayhem I reported to the commanding officer and told him what I knew
and I left the cp laid out close by where's many as a dozen bodies covered with ponchos I
hurried on instead of staying low on the slope I headed over toward the top of the ridge I don't
he was interested in hearing me he's already in a so darn deep he didn't care about any more
detail see he knew he was in a over his hand yeah it's old information met this point yeah
when I reached the top of the ridge I snuck my head I stuck my head over the crest in the next
incident Japanese machine gun cut loose at me with a long burst sending a streamable
it's snapping just inches above the head that brought me to my senses and I ran down the slope
into the jungle I stood there for a minute grap gasping for breath shaking and thinking holy smokes
almost bought the farm on that one holy smokes
that count is one of your close calls micro close yeah yeah that's what I'm now you've already
covered two of them now two out of eight there's actually there's there's three more on Guadalcanale
that you'll get to in a subiet well what do they say a cat has nine lives so luckily we only have
eight to cover otherwise the ninth one we wouldn't be here since it's here talking on November 25th
we were pulled off the line in sent to positions near in the rear near Hendersonfield for the next
15 days we slept in open sighted tents on the grove of coconut palms on ground that was
saw from frequent heavy rain showers there was always a possibility that Japanese warships
would foray and to see large channel during the night and throw a few hundred large cowlblows shells
into our soggy environments but these dangers were negligible compared to what we had recently
been through on the front line and we did not worry about them actually we did not worry about
much of anything we were emotionally and physically drained and lacked both energy and inclination
to worry we mostly sat around doing nothing partly because we had nothing much to do but also
because we were sort of in a days you might say we were numb it was not it was not an unpleasant
state we were purely glad to be alive and the fact that no one was shooting at us at least not
directly or intentionally made us feel downright you fork we were living for the moment and for the moment
everything was fine and we were content see now we're coming down with malaria as well you see
now the other thing you go into here which is interesting is during this period of number
Marines took steps to upgrade their personal armament the main object of their desire was the
superb M1 grand semi-automatic rifle that had been issued to the army this still had the old ones
the model 1903 springfield we carried was a fine weapon but it was obsolete the old salts loved
the O3 like a Viking loves his broad sword but the kids were unsend metal about the rifle because
they had no history with it so you say while some Marines acquired their M1s through honest
scrounging in battlefield scavenging others resorted to outright theft and you go through some
methods that that were used to do that who is also moonlighting you guys had Tommy Guns
which you said weren't really all that great for most of the purposes the rising
you know for a while we even had shotgun you know yeah on the night of 30 to 31 November
at Japanese beginning the beginning using the flame source as well is there too at that time
rough weapon right there oh yeah on the night of 30 to 31 November a Japanese task force
steamed in the sea large channel of bringing food to the Belieger Japanese forces on Guadalcanal
our warships sailed forth to intercept it meeting the enemy fleet in that off-to-speweded gap
between savvoiled and Guadalcanal just off Tassa Farango how do you say that it's right
Tassa Farango point because our Bivolac was situated inland on low ground I heard the battle but
did not see it our fleet took an awful beating one of our heavy cruisers the North Hampton was
struck by two torpedoes within a matter of seconds consumed by fire she sank a few hours later
you're still sure the heavy crew cruisers Minneapolis Minneapolis New Orleans and Pensacola
were severely damaged and the sailors were coming off off of an off cover with oil
and so would they swim into shore some did probably did it was right near the shore
yeah the battle had been a clear tactical victory for the Japanese but a strategic defeat
the task force had failed with its primary mission to deliver food to the Japanese army on Guadalcanal
this was a calamitous development for the Japanese even before the battle their food stocks were
desperately not low now they began falling below substance levels the entire enemy army was
growing physically weaker because the soldiers simply didn't have enough to eat
we were in better shape than the Japanese overall but only in a relative sense the first marine
division in particular was greatly reduced by illness and sheer exhaustion as well as by battle casualties
it had suffered in four months of fighting yeah a large number of its men were unfit for duty
and many more were only marginally capable of rendering effective frontline service the
high command recognizing that the entire division had just about reached the end of its
operation utility pulled it off the front lines began sending it units to Australia starting on nine
December yeah so they after my birthday December it's so you wave goodbye to those guys as they're
leaving and meanwhile on 11 December the 8th marine's resume returned to the ridges yeah right
but we didn't really take off until first part of the January I guess and the final drive
and then so it's you on one set of ridges and the Japanese were on the other side they were usually
somewhere right on the first slope in front of us they were dug in like gulfers like gulfer holes
but most are more further back on the next over the next next ridge so there'd be you on one
day they would come up close no so hang on a zed us heard so hang on a zed each other all right
these dispositions meaning these two ridges that you guys had occupied both ours and those
the enemy remained substantially unchanged for the next 34 days yeah the brass anxious to void
a repeat performance of the november battles in order to temporary halt to large scale offensive
operations instead we were told to hold the line and harass the enemy with aggressive patrols and
raids in the meantime our air and naval forces would strive to introduce the Tokyo Express which is
their supply chain now while we were at that location there was a sergeant from the Jason company
and he had a tummy gun and he didn't enough at enough action going on where he was
steady was coming down the line where there's air reaction he wanted to get into it well he came
he came right by where I was and no one in two months when great was right shortly after that one
of our one of our rounds dropped in short he lost two legs in an arm and he was in there's
an article in the said reading post about it and saying that at least I have the right arm to
wrap the bar with for a drink I'll tell about it and there's some too
words uh you guys that during this you also talk about the fact that you would be young
stuff back and forth to the Japanese they're a little bit a little bit they'd be yelling at you
guys and you'd yell back at them and it sounds like during the daytime well you say it was during
the daytime was a policy became one of live and let live during the day of a much different policy
ruled at night after the case yeah and they were sneaking in on the server now and then make a little
trying to sneak in and maybe get one of our guys in a fox hole yeah you're going to one of those
one night during a heavy downport of Japanese crept up from the ravines the sound of their movement
mass by the falling rain and jump the crew a ferocious hand-a-hand struggle ensued I heard our
men yelling help oh god they're in our whole help help they're blood curling cries and thrashing sounds
were plainly audible to everyone in the vicinity there were on a point little bit a little bit
a head of our regular line and this has gotta be just this is on a mental weedless and
horrified but stayed in our holes that's how bad it was to get out of your holes you don't dare
because you you anybody outside the holes enemy suddenly the yelling sounds of the fighting
ceased we actually waited and listened to pairing through the rain and into the darkness
then the Japanese begin probing our position all up and down the line running up to the
crest and chucking a few grenades over the top at our holes and running back down hill after
the grenades exploded usually harmlessly our guys would leap from their holes dashed to the
crest and throw grenades at the fleeting enemy then they'd scamper back to their holes and the
Japanese would return to herle their grenades back and forth and went through the night intervals
of silence and then flash bang of grenades exploding and men hollering and cursing in the English and
Japanese the next morning we discovered that one of them men in the machine gun post had been killed
that's that day and headed to death the others have been wounded but somehow they'd beaten back
their attackers and you were saying this earlier you we also conducted aggressive patrols
and probe their lines at giving as good as we got or maybe even better if more frontline
Japanese soldiers had survived the war maybe be reading memoirs by those veterans of
Guadalcanal campaign recounting how the US Marines terrorized them at night and terrorized
them we most certainly did some guys really enjoyed this part of the job teenagers who found
their true nature in the jungle who discovered that they were born for the warrior life
there were very there were a few in every unit more than a few actually more than you might expect
more than I expected they went after the Japanese with a competence and enthusiasm that made
them almost as frightening to their officers as they must have been to their enemies it was just
amazing observed Murdoch how you could take kids like these and put them out into the jungle
and in just a few weeks they'd be great at jungle warfare for them it was like playing cowboys and
Indians they'd come back from a patrol and you'd hear them talk how many teeth did you get
or how many did you kill and they'd brag while I killed three or four now I wanted these patrols
much earlier than what we're talking about right now I was leading this patrol and had four
five others with me and we ended up we were in a location where the army had now passed through
our lines and they were in control so we came right by the reddish metal regimental CP and the
army colonel says what do you guys doing here said well we got it with constant patrols as
well we're in charge here now we don't need you any more and so we said so the we moved
on for a little bit further back to our own line where we were in reserve and it turned out
we had a little bit higher than we was so he'd look up at us and we were on the skyline from
his from his perspective very skyline and then we would at peace of well you're going to track
fire being up there well here's parsley crack but not entirely well anyway as we as we
left my man says say they're they're two or three snipers in a tree right over there C.P.
what should we do I said shoot them so we shot them killed them and and told the Colonel
he just shot three snipers right over here C.P.
and later on later on I'm and we return in 1982 there's a there's a big Catholic church right
there now and I talked to the to the not a priest when next went up who's there and I
tell him about it and then that same later on that same day well he so he he's the one
as a young as a young priest he's the one that rescued Joel Foss when he got shut down
I've gotten the water and he's all tangled up in his fairs who've never been out
to tell him about it well later on that day we saw we saw Joel Foss and then in here he met
he met this priest you know and he was talking about it and so anyway what's interesting is that
when they told us this army Colonel what we had just done the Colonel was still unhappy with us
and and and at the same reunion when we saw Joel Foss and all there was there was a
veteran army who had previously had been a Marine in China and he joined the National Guard
and that's where he was out there this time and he came to me he says you know
I just heard you talking I was there and you had a beard like Santa Claus and it says you were there yeah
and that says after you left I told the Colonel says you know after all we're on the same side
a small world yeah that's crazy after all these years you know we talked a little bit about
about Murdoch and and he's quite the character and you talk about him a little bit here
because captain what happened to Captain of the block you get somehow somehow Murdoch ends up taking over
eventually the block was relieved and replaced by Murdoch who's an ideal a Boston Irishman
Murdoch was very funny and very tough a superb combat a superb combat commander and a bit wild too
all traits that is younger charges greatly appreciated one manifestation of his toughness apart from his
courage and coolness under fire was his disdain for metals and combinations very few men who had
him as their CEO including me received decorations Murdoch explained I didn't recommend many people
I didn't care if a machine gunner killed 50 men that's what he was supposed to do that's what he's
getting paid for that was my attitude once in Hawaii we had a big for the formation with the
division and they decorated all these guys one company would give 40 metals out I'd give one my attitude
was hey killing japs is our job we're not doing it for metals yeah and here here you start to talk
about just the whole just the the brutality of what's going on over there one of the themes
running through the preceding anecdotes is the merciless nature of the Pacific war the Marine
court had tried to prepare us for this in our training bayonet drills were especially important
in reality in combat there to be aggressive you see right right yeah in reality in combat there are
few instances when men used bayonets in the traditional manner fixed to the rifles bayonet drills
were performed for their psychological effect so that men would learn the psychology of the bayonet
namely to kill brutally quickly and unthinkingly without compunction or moral qualms so
done realistic as far as the application right but our training merely paved the way for our
transformation into hardened killers exposure to actual combat accomplished and completed the
process you got hard or you died it was that simple killer be a killer be killed you know
and the Japanese made it simple they were they were notoriously unspearing their reputation
for ruthlessness and savagery was widespread and well-founded we knew all the stories the rape of
Nand King the Badan death marks atrocities committed far and wide and often against prisoners
we believed correctly that we could expect no pity if we fell into their hands they neither
asked for quarter nor gave any and we responded in kind if they had set rules as we believed
we were damn sure going to play by them one other choice do we have they simply would not
surrender they would not stop coming out us until we killed them very quickly we learned that
trying to take prisoners was a waste of time and dangerous even the wounded if we went to treat them
would try and kill us by usually by blowing up everyone themselves and the corpsmen who had
stopped to help them with a grenade the dead had a nasty habit of rising up from the ground
and attacking us so we made sure the dead were truly dead no sense in taking chances this killer
be killed approach to war was as brutalizing as it was brutal and affected everyone to some degree
Murdock recalled a corpsman who came up to me and said hey lieutenant I've got well I've got
a live one can I shoot him I said sure go ahead corpsman won't want to want to
expose to have weapons and we shouldn't have shot that wounded guy but I let him do it
we all we all did it all the time because if we took a prisoner it would take two men at least
to send him back to the rear and we were so thin our lines were really thin because we had a lot of
guy's sick our units were very much depleted thus we became inert to the horrors of war and not
surprisingly we did horrible things not without reason when your enemy behaves in a beastial fashion
it is only natural to look on them as beasts natural and to some extent justify or they consider
his animals really but we were not without sin in this regard far from it Murdock for example
never took any prisoners and here's Murdock I wasn't nice I did bad things looking back over the
years I can say we probably committed as many atrocities against the dead bodies of the Japanese
as they did to ours pulling teeth for example goal for example we'd heard japs wanted to die looking
at the sun so we'd rolled them over and stick their faces in the dirt so we couldn't so they
couldn't see the sun our guys would cut off fingers and make fobs which believe are not with
the finger of the japs finger hanging down and they'd go out there with the knives and pliers
trying to pull out gold teeth but if some of us truly relished but if some of them men truly relished
battle embraced and enjoyed it enjoyed the killing the brutality the horror all of it it is important
to establish that on the continuum of brutal human behavior the rest of us were not all that far
removed from them and we tended to move closer as the war went on some manner more capable than
others when it comes to killing but all men are capable one way we improved on this capability
such improvement being vital to our effectiveness as Marines not to mention our very survival
was to look on our enemy as hateful creatures less than human from a psychological standpoint
it became easy to kill them we were killing animals not men and after killing them we would look
upon their dead bodies and feel nothing no remorse no guilt no horror pity or whatever from there
it was just a small step to place in the geography of the mind we were pulling gold teeth out
of corpses was not all that outrageous but now many were doing that there's just a few crazy guys
doing it and one of my one of my sergeants that did that and he had a whole had a whole pocket full
and for some reason rather something happy changes fans or something and they were all so
I'll get some more yeah I like the fact that you said basically that I mean somebody asked me
about dehumanizing the enemy and when we were fighting and I rack and I said the enemy dehumanizes
themselves with their what their actions that they would take and that's the same situation here
you know the in Iraq the insurgents would be head people and skin people alive and just do
absolutely horrible I don't know what the Turks seem to be doing that right now it seems like I don't
know that's a thing cleansing yeah there's definitely some uh it's hard to figure out what's going on
over there right now I saw some fresh reports of what going on in the absolute yeah it does not look good you
also had some people that couldn't that didn't adopt that mentality and here's Murdoch talking
about it talking about people that couldn't adopt that killer be killed mentality he said they'd
have to go back because they were no good to us they just disappear they'd be sent back to the
states it was a self-weeding process the guys who remained were the guys you could depend on
when I became company commander New Zealand that was an awful thing I had to do we could send
3% of our personnel home every so often so they could start new outfits back in the states
but you never wanted to send the good guys home you send the shitheads and the screwups I wanted
the best men with me I didn't want any of my good men to go in New Zealand just before we sailed
for Talawa Tarawa Murdoch told our company now listen I'm gonna send some of you guys home if you
fuck up you're going to go but he told me later these kids were so good they just wouldn't do that
they wouldn't fuck up on purpose they would do their job and do it well they didn't want to be
come known as a fuck up and a lot of those kids were killed on Talawa that I could have sent home
but that's what happened because I wanted to keep the good guys with me man that's a powerful
statement all these guys have to do is be slackers and they'll get sent home to the states but they
wouldn't do it that's the Marine Corps. The thing is this isn't a general average opinion I don't think
he was a little bit overboard and all this discussion you know he's not difficult in other words
but he was he was well-liked because of because of when he looked at life
yeah he talks about one guy here he says I had one guy a platoon a lieutenant platoon leader will call him
Mac. Yeah not as real names. That's the one I took over from and then where I almost got killed.
He says he was a Yale graduate came from Connecticut very well brought up had money nice guy too
and handsome a rugged look good looking Marine but on Guadalcanal he'd go on patrol he just could not handle it
while he'd go bean yes was his platoon sergeant and he'd have to take over Mac's patrols all the time
Mac tried but he couldn't do it I respected him for that he was trying the kids were calling him yellow
and they'd say to me we don't want that guy he's yellow and I'd say wait just a minute that guy is not
yellow he tried to do the job but he's just not he couldn't just couldn't do it just going to
a yellow man doesn't go out and try he quits Mac won't go this go deenia see became an officer
he married an anus elin gal I knew him pretty well all right so continuing on here by December
our long so during the front line of taking a big toll we were wasted by illness multiple illnesses
we were malnourished and looked it we went about shirtless showing squannie bodies with protruding ribs
and vertebrae and salose skin stretched over stretched hotly over them our faces were drawn
in angular beneath scraggly beards and our eyes were recessed in their orbits we didn't have a
change of clothes during that period and we became unimaginably filthy we looked scary and
menacing and pitiful a lot of us came down with yellow jannus see that that would do a
liberate that would do you and too you know the constant threat of enemy attack punctuated by
intermittent balance of actual fighting was tremendously stressful it seemed that much of the time
we were either waiting to be attacked or being attacked or attacking the enemy ourselves or we were
just sitting around trying to get some rest but feeling cruddy because we were sick and we always
were tensed up thinking and worrying about our next combat action depending on how your day was going
such concerns might be in the forefront of your thoughts incessant and acute making you all
edgy and fretful or they might be buried deep usually they were somewhere in between but they were
always present in your head and on your mind you could never fully let go or get rid of them
the unrelenting mental strain not to do not not to mention the physical dangers that caused it
made us twitch your each passing day you know during the during the times that we were
we were back behind the front lines and nobody's shooting at you home like I said it's wonderful
nobody's shooting at me and all that stress you know now you now you don't have to worry about it
now what about the fact that even though no one's shooting at you right now you have time to
sit there and think about the fact that you're going to go again and the enemy's going to attack you
and you know somebody pull up pull it what it was stupid thing so it's through a hand grenade
dummy into a tent everybody just took off why would a guy do that I don't understand he thought it was funny
I'll tell you why I'm laughing when you tell that story because one of my friends what
am I good friends a guy by the name of Lave Babin who I work with and wrote a book with
wrote two books with him actually he did that two a couple of his guys took a
took a grenade and we were in Ramadi and he took a grenade the pin was in it was still taped up
but it was real grenade and there was a couple of guys sitting in a room talking and he just opened
the door and rolled the grenade in there we were just talking about the other day yeah oh yeah
we were just talking about the reason I remember we were just talking about yesterday and he goes
yeah that wasn't smart it wasn't smart because who knows what's going to happen I mean those guys
it with they had guns they might have shot I mean there's all kinds of crazy things that couldn't happen
you make it mean later on yet in here but also in our last drive on Guadalconelle I had
an enemy grenade filled right there by my legs and I tried to kick it away and hit something came
right on back it was a dud. Here's Murdoch talking about Guadalconelle and why what made it
what made it Guadalconelle he said each campaign was different each with different problems
Tar was the worst in terms of fighting but the battle lasted only three days right after it
we right after it ended we were taken off Baycheo and sent back to Hawaii but on Guadalconelle
we were on Guadalconelle for three months. For the amount of time we were there we didn't do
all that much fighting but there were other things the sickness and the heat especially the
living conditions were the worst on Guadalconelle and then you say as bad as it was it was worse
for the Japanese much worse their condition was no mystery for us as December gave way to January
there was a noticeable drop off an enemy activity that we correctly ascribed to their deteriorating
health their nocturnal probes dwindled and in time virtually ceased altogether they simply
lacked the energy to come out us in the night. We didn't know they didn't even bother to yell at us
they rarely achieved success when they did attack in battle we found we had as we been told on
Simoa the Japanese made the same mistakes over and over for instance they would commit their units
to battle as they became available instead of holding them back and massing them for a single
powerful blow and they would keep coming in small coming out of until they were killed primarily
by our artillery the carnage was sickening even to us weak and we couldn't understand why they
never seemed to learn from their experiences and make the necessary adjustments. One one thing
that was wrong with their strategy that they they had attacked and there was no command to change
are you going to go out of flying or something like that to just keep coming and keep coming
to other all kill. Yeah that's a lack of leadership and maneuver warfare right that's not
no maneuver no maneuver at all no maneuver just hey we're going forward we're going to do a
a frontal assault and they would just get killed to get mode down and that happened time and
time again. Here we are coming in the terror law the same situation we had no no way to maneuver
anything and just keep going into facing heavy machine gun fire just like the Japanese did.
The Japanese thought their indelvinable will would provide them with a margin for victory it did
not occur to them or they could not acknowledge that the Marines and soldiers they were battling
were equally indelvinable and in the end victorious. They had so easy on moving all down through the
the east end is not that and it's just everything just just faded away and they just kept going
no problem at all. And then they met American forces. So then so this is this is a turning point
of going to go out and where they that's where they return the tables now where now we're in the offensive. Yeah
do so January 10th you begin going on off. Eighth Marines the one eight the two eight and the
three eight I worked with the three eight a bunch of your body they were outstanding. Yeah our mission orders
issued by General Patch were to attack and destroy the Japanese format forces remaining on Guadalcanal.
Yeah. We moved up and I'm just reading and I always have to mention this I'm obviously not reading
this whole book. I could read this whole book. I want to read this whole book because the book is
outstanding but I'm jumping around so if it seems a little bit scattered it's because I'm jumping
from I'm skipping over big chunks that you're telling with great detail and and this is this is one
of the most outstanding accounts that exists of these campaigns. So just know that you have to buy
the book the book is called Faith for Warriors. So here we go we moved we pushed on we moved up
and over hill 82 the hill and jungle draws below were in festo with Japanese my men saw a
single Japanese soldier and open fire killing him instantly I collected some personal effects from
his body a diary a lock of hair a first aid kit a photograph of a group of soldiers and a
thousand stitch belt which is a piece of cloth embroidered with a thousand stitches by wellwishers
that he carried for good luck. No I sent a lot of this stuff that we took off of the dead home
to Japan to their to their families eventually. Eventually and we'll probably get into a bit but
the I received a letter from the brother one of these soldiers just beautifully done calligraphy
you know. Yeah so you you held on to this stuff and eventually figured out who this got
did that because we we were asked to talk to a Japanese in Los Angeles and there's a Japanese
Japanese area there and the the the priest there suggested I do that he couldn't speak any
English but through the translation I knew that that's what had to do and so we sent it
to the to the relatives of Philadelphia worked with at North American Aviation and
his wife's family were Honda which is a Honda car and so we sent her to one of her cousins
and when they they came to Fay baseball in this country after the war and they lost so they
had lost face to so to speak so they wanted to go back with something so they took this all
of these items that I'd taken off of these soldiers that we're talking about here and they put it
in a white box strong around their neck as they got as they landed in Hawaii a lot of
Buddhist priests were there with me to play when they got to Tokyo all a big thing always picked up
and my name got all over all over Japan about over that incredible. What were you thinking about
at the time I mean at the time you couldn't have been thinking about that all that was going
to happen. You know and also you know where we we were asked to attend this Buddhist ceremony
and my family had made three daughters with me and here we're the first ones in line and you're
we're supposed to you're supposed to you had to carry these incense and there's a gong and
goes on and well bunch of stuff we we led that procession as it went by then after that we we had a
get together sokiyaki and and beer in the in the percentage yeah and I'd be real careful
what I said you know I had my friend as a translator be real careful they didn't call them
japs and all that yeah and I said how come come there's so interesting what happened here
as well these these people from northern part of Japan and they had no clue of what had
happened to their soldiers way down south yeah because they didn't have enough weightness is
living after the war you know to explain and then on on site pan and I was talking to Donny
Edwards we were there at you been there you know where this what this call suicide clip
well there there's one monument there and there were paid for by children raising the money
and one of them faces south kneeling a mother mourning over her lost her sons lost in the
south city the other was facing the suicide cliff mourning the children that were carried over
the cliff to be killed and what is happening was they were just putting in the new monument
they hadn't don't have the new captions yet and I was explaining to Donny what that what that
was all about and it's on it's it's on uh uh uh Instagram go to Instagram and you go to best
defense foundation and they'll tell about it okay yeah so even though you're gathering souvenirs this
is not over yet and here you go the fighting was constant but not everywhere at the same time one squad
might be resting wall nearby another was engaged with a sharp fight yeah it's true with a sniper
machine gunness and all up and down the line automatic weapons rattled rifles crack grenades
popped the air carry this the stringent smell of cordite in places where there had been a lot of
firing the atmosphere was hazy with gunsmoke and the smoke of burning foliage there was a lot of
shouting someone screaming the and the frequent cry corpsman corpsman stretcher down this is not
a general atmosphere this this is a certain locations this is happening because not here where you say
yeah because then this is because the Japanese were really depleted at this point pretty much so yeah they
will yeah uh stretcher bearers many of them musicians in the divisions band yeah right ran around
the battlefield picking up the wounded and carrying them back the battalion aid station so every
Marines arrive amen as well as there's the band out there there's the pressure pressure bearers
yeah 14 January we continue to advance the action much the same as the day before
intermittent class with Japanese diehard some of the Japanese we came upon
blew themselves up and their holes were just sat there and let us kill them with the grenades
yeah my puttune made good progress you got a guy named the blowing sounds up a little hand
grenade right here put he had it and kick it off and his team blown south up right over here
so with they trying to take Marines with him not well yeah as they could but when you get
in a side panel explain there how would we we saw a hundred over a hundred doing that as we
advance and they could have shot back as they didn't instead they just we got so close
and they blown themselves bang bang bang as we as we as we had passed incredible
uh one guy you lost a guy named Gunner Lund and you with a gunner Lund had kind of a
had a kid that looked up to him made her shall wheelcy and you and he wrote he's a
one that did some of these illustrations okay and in this one here okay so wheel ski you're
the one that has to tell wheel ski that you know his his he is no more he's no more and here we
are shortly thereafter it fell upon me to break the news of Lund's death to corporal hercial
wheel ski ski as he was known was a bar man and a squad leader in Lund's puttune yeah
he took Lund's death very hard gunner Lund was a popular figure and B company an old salt
who was trusted and respected for his courage competence and common sense battle wisdom
and loved for his tough his rough humor and for the obvious and genuine affection
and concerned he felt for his young charges before the war he had been sea going marine
serving on the beloved aircraft the Lexington he'd always been smoking a cigar how
we was able to keep himself stock with stowies on guano canals anyone's guess such
of the talents of an old salt he used to say that after the war he was going to buy himself a
big shiny cattle act convertible and ride around smoking his cigars instead of that high
visit his family after the war he had a sister that had been to a dance and they couldn't
find her anywhere she was dead in the trunk they found her body in the trunk of the car
been murdered and they got this this same time as hit as when he the family found out about Lund
oh yeah you said that that was a simple dream for a simple very good man a dream never realized
all the kids looked up to Lund wheel skiing particular ski idolized Lund the gunner was everything
to him a hero mentor father figure older brother and best friend at first he refused to
believe that Lund had been killed yeah i was just talking to him a few minutes ago he said
but then the truth said again and he became distraught and threw his weapon on the ground this
damn war he exclaimed yeah ski then announced he was quitting the marine core and quitting the war
he meant what he said he was about to head back to the rear when Murdoch arrived on the scene
Murdoch's calm ski down and told him that he just couldn't up and quit that it would be
desertion in the face of the enemy and that he would get a lot of trouble for it Murdoch spoke
softly with him for several minutes in this vein until ski came to a senses ski picked up as
weapon and rejoined third platoon and Murdoch assumed command of that unit but ski was a changed man
exchanging one man as for another he went from being a marine who did his job and did it well
to being a marine who did his job with a singular passion from that day forward he hated the
Japanese with a savage intensity and took it on himself to personally avenge Lund's death
often going off by himself to hunt the enemy if you were a compassionate man you might say a
prayer for any Japanese soldiers who crossed his path he always returned eventually but with
little to say about his exploits he was the quiet type guys like him usually are yeah
he's the impediment he pedamy of a combat marine and so this continues on and then you say this
and so to the end my memory of the final days of January offensive is blurry and I find it
difficult to remember the details that reunions we reminisce about our very limited personnel
personal perspective of the offense and the countless little battles that were fought as we went
forward at that perilous time we focused primarily on our own concerns about adequate cover for
incoming artillery and other life threatening events in our immediate area we advanced on a broad
front but never in an even line some units always move faster than others depending on the terrain
and the resistance they encountered we went up and down more hills and ridges up and down up and down
sometimes fighting and killing the Japanese sometimes just killing them and to January or last week
on guadal canal be company was bivalact by Henderson Field awaiting transport off the island while
there I came down with jaundice and I lost a lot of weight I would be getting off the island just
in time in the meantime there were no duties to perform some of them very on there's on the
in the meantime there were still duties to perform in some of them very unpleasant one of Murdoch's
responsibility was to record the location of the battle site graves on an overlay it troubled him
that the locations couldn't always be specifically pin-boinered so there was no so there could be no assurance
that the bodies would later be found for relocation to permanent cemetery now regarding those bodies
year or so go the organization that at locate bodies and get some buried all there and
they're in hoi and on lilloo and they ran out of money but they were going to pay for me go down
and help them locate these bodies we're talking about but the guy that he was he was a doctorate
and he says I just I just ran out of legal room money wise couldn't do it
so finally this is last year wow yeah well maybe we can raise some money for him
this was a call cheap back and then it's now a new name they probably might say they were missed missed
they were missed missed they were missed handling money there's many money where they shouldn't have
been so a lot of those going on you probably heard about and then the new secretary fan came
down he did he just changed the whole thing around so we wrapped this up the section on January
on 31 January the one eight and the entire second regiment boarded the troop transport crescent city
and then during the first week of February the Japanese managed to evacuate more than 11,000 troops
a minor triumph that did little to offset the magnets you do there to feet they lost upward of 25,000 men
in Guadalcanal campaign of these maybe a thousand were taken prisoner our losses were comparatively small
according to army historians about 1600 were killed and 4,245 were wounded on nine February the
rest of the eighth Marines left Guadalcanal on board the troop ship hunter ligate at American
Legion that same day Guadalcanal was declared secure one way or another for the living and the dead
the fighting on Guadalcanal was over forever
so your next chapter here is called heaven yeah because from the hell of Guadalcanal you went to
a place called New Zealand and this was quite the change for you all going from Guadalcanal
to New Zealand no longer sweating jungles you you highlight some of the good things about
New Zealand and then then you get to what apparently is the biggest highlight in New Zealand
it says this there were girls holy smokes whether they're all gone but they were
they were welcome here so for no because they're men were overfighting because they were
in North Africa young girls pretty girls smiling girls they were everywhere lots of them
my girl my girlfriend was 19 and not here I was I was approaching 23 he 22 she's still alive she's
95 no wow can you imagine they stared at us and we stared at them and they smiled at us
and we smiled at them and in many instances we greeted each other and exchange pleasantries
and actually conversed with them even the castanovas among us had a hard gov at at first
it had been a long time since we had spoken with girls we were out of practice we were also
gasey is the term you use staring inward a thousand yards back into our heads flashing on our
thoughts and visions of Guadalcanal put in there our faces and what do you have for that
just be just yeah just remembering yeah
the contrast was immediately apparent profoundly jarring we had learned how to handle hell
but heaven would take some getting used to a board ship we we hadn't been aware of our gasey
conditioned we all seem normal to each other but here in this beautiful city among these wonderful
civilized people among all those pretty girls it was possible to see how far from normal we were
what would they think of us they loved us and we loved them right back so you guys I mean you
do talk about some of the things that happened there and some of those adjustments getting into it
and and then the kind of I guess the kind of mayhem and chaos that you were more dark himself
he there's one story about where where he come barging barging into the owner the woman owner
the hotel where our her officers mess where the get together was and it tells about it in there
yeah anyway he comes he called he crawled he was drunk no clothes on I guess and crawled along an
edge and then wrapped on the window and she opened it up that I mean he ended up going then next morning
woke up here's with us older woman and oh my gosh yes she says something like you know good
morning he says did I have a good time or something like that but she said yes you did
sounded like he she he was avoiding her for the rest of the time yeah yeah you
all right to get back to the military side of this after a few weeks new Zealand we started
training in earnest we we needed a lot of training both to get ourselves back into shape and incorporate
replacements who are streaming in from the states our experience on Guadalcanal provided the template
for our training we built positions on the Japanese model and practiced attacking them we advanced
through wooded areas against simulated sniper attacks we worked on the use of supporting fires
and we worked with tanks one of the most important changes overall was to give the squad leaders
more freedom of action to make decisions in combat let them decide on their own how to maneuver
their men and move around to develop and any members I'm sure there's no room for maneuver
no no no chance to use tanks but it's interesting you know we we talk a lot about
kind of the principles of combat leadership and one of the most important principles of combat
leadership is decentralized command and that is allowing your support and leaders to lead and that
right there even the private say even a private say come on guys this going he pull them together
let's go yeah and and you that's obviously you're taking that lesson that's it then you say
that's a change overall yeah you guys even you all realized hey we need our frontline troops to
be able to lead yeah yeah I mentioned that when I I spoken to Marine Corps League you know
the Marine Corps birthday balls know that and I mentioned that leadership aspect
you're written books about two I know I have it's one of the things I talk about all the time
oh yeah and when I taught leadership inside the steel teams that's one of the main things I
needed the young troopers to do who you would have been a disaster that had happened yeah
so fast forward a bit through the you talk some more about that training and what it's like
in New Zealand and the continues on and then finally we get to this I'm not going to say that
we knew we were leaving for good but many sense this might be the case so did everyone in Wellington
the girls especially just before our ships cast off again for Hawks Bay a number of girls some
hugely pregnant came down to the docks to find out what was going on nobody could or would tell them anything
but many had dire for it nobody knew you guys didn't even know we did had no no never clue
without we're going another another another land here exercise our ship steam north past Hawks Bay
continued on a northern league yet after a few days it's he was announced that we were going to
invade the Taroa toll in the Gilbert Islands maps and sand tables were brought it out one square mile
one square mile our sudden permanent disappearance from New Zealand was very hard on our Kiwi
girlfriends and wives one day they woke up to find us gone a new year head into battle
then towards the end of November they started hearing rumors that a lot of us had been killed
the rumors proved to be true yeah we lost over eleven hundred killed and twenty five hundred
wounded in three days most of them two days so you get to Taroa and here we are the navy promised
us a preliminary build bombardment that would blow the Japanese and their defenses to kingdom come
leaving the Marines to carry out what would amount to little more than a mopping up operation
during a pre invasion staff briefing an admiral announced that it was not the navy's intention
merely to neutralize ratio island gentlemen he told me assemblage we will obliterate it
this statement was passed on to rank and file and we believed it at the same briefing a battle ship
captain declared we are going to bombard at six thousand yards we've got so much armor
we're not afraid of anything the japs control back at us the commander of the second marine
division major general julian c-smith was in sense to buy the captains brave words gentlemen
he retorted remember one thing when the Marines land and meet the enemy at bay net point
the only armor a marine will have is his khaki shirt it is unbelievable though when you see
the bombardment you can see film of the bombardment at Taroa i mean they just look like it was just
obliterators right and i had i had a situation where my guys in the battle of ramaati
got caught in a friendly fire situation and you were there ramaati yep and uh an army unit that
we had called for qrf came in and put about 150 rounds of 50 caliber machine gun fire into the building
that my guys were in at a range of about 25 meters 150 rounds and you you would think anybody
that's seen a 50 caliber machine gun you'd think everyone in that building would be dead but
what i'd one guy get wounded it wasn't actually all that bad and so when you see the the that's
why you can never trust that you know big bombs are going to actually solve the problem it doesn't
always happen and this is a classic example of that and the main reason that naval gun fire
wasn't wasn't all that effective is that we're just only you know the land was only about six
foot above sea level so things you must have just gone over if you hit there it's just such a narrow
target and they what you should have done is landed on a adjacent island and pounded it with
what the way mortars are you know a sharp rain artillery safe fire and that's what they did and that's
what they did in the marshals they made all difference their world less and learn to no much later
so you say this it's tough going right from the start the Japanese are heavily armed firmly and deeply
entrenched and as always they've resist fiercely infecting heavy uh inflicting heavy casualties
on our assault teams the radio reports start coming in their spotty and intermittent but we get the
picture encountering heavy resistance heavy machine gun fire boats destroyed units scattered
many casualties the voices on the loudspeakers are numerate these calamities and measured tones
they sound calm almost attached if you if you didn't know better you'd think the situation wasn't too
terrible but we knew better we were all looking at each other thinking some version of oh boy this is bad
this is really bad the tides the tides which were supposed to cover the reef to an adequate depth
proved uncooperative the waters too shallow just inches and just inches deep in some spots
and always less than needed for the three foot draft of the landing craft see the problem
was that there was just barely three feet what we require for now CBP to clear the reef
but we got hung up with their big guns their their big naval guns shooting under
transports so our transports had to move further out that means the all landing craft took a
lot longer to get in and the meantime the tide was going out now we didn't have three feet
not only that it was the kind of a tide that was extra low so you you were actually
part of the reserve element is that is that the right we were going what you were doing the one
out the the battalion on him was going to was supposed to land on the next island up
instead hey oh we need to write down here in real and unright the middle where the worst of
it was so here here we had our guys on the beach and here here the enemy should know where
they're head right at us out there we could do anything but yeah terrible so just for folks
they don't understand what you just said you've got marines on the beach on the beach looking at us
Washington's being mowed down and you're at sea and we can't shoot back you can't shoot because
now there's friendly forces in between you two just and like you said the sea level is only
are the altitude only six feet and not only that there was one beach to have a British transport
and it was beach it it had been run before we landed there sometime before about time before
our work and run up like on on the reef and just was still there while the Japanese swam up to it
with the machine guns they fired flying in fire right on us so all this is happening and you
run the reserves and finally you guys are told all right load your boats which means you guys
now know you're going in and you say here we don't know whether the brass is setting us yet but we
don't expect to go where the fighting is hottest and we expect to go soon we circle and circle
in the lagoon we're standing in the boat either leaning against the sides or holding on them
for balance in general we have a soft ride because the water is mostly still except for the
turbulence caused by all the boats the turbulence buffets the LCVPs and this movement combined
with the stench of the engine and the nervous tension we all feel makes many of a sick some of the sick
men some of the sick men stick their heads over the sides to stretch while there's puke into the
wooden deck the men standing next to them just step aside like it's no big deal to get sick
because it really isn't a big deal when the men when the sick men finish wretched they straighten
up as if nothing had happened no one thinks the worst of them for it after a while depending on how
long we're out there in the boat the deck might be slippery with puke but that's no big deal either
you can't smell the vomit or anything else for that matter because the exhaust fumes overpower
every other smell diesel engine help the minutes go by lengthening into hours the hours go by
but we're going nowhere we're just going around and around the sounds of battle are muted this far out
we can hear artillery explosions but not small arms fire we're all peering over the sides looking
abysio looking at the fires and the smoke and the explosions it's an awesome sight a massive smoke and
flames holy Moses look at that we say not for the last time we ask ourselves how many of the
defenders how the defenders could survive in a place so torn up it's an irrelevant question really
many Japanese have survived and they're killing them but have them survived we know that a lot of
our men were killed going in and we know that the men who did make it a sure are fighting for their
lives we expect we'll have a tough go of it to wear apprehensive who wouldn't be and we're wondering
how we'll behave in combat I know the new guys are especially concerned with how they'll behave
the great fear the greatest of fear is you won't be able to handle it that you'll turn yellow
that you'll let your buddies down we fear this much more than we fear getting killed or wounded
one reason for that is no one really thinks he'll be killed or wounded you never think it's going
to happen to you never you acknowledge that it could happen to you that it might happen to you
but the rational part of your brain makes you understand this but in the such circumstances we now
find ourselves emotion trumps rationality every time we know we're too young to die and somehow
in a kind of strange and protective twist of logic and feeling we figure that because we're too
young to die we certainly won't die you've got to do a lot of hard thinking to reach this conclusion
however and because we're all thinking so hard we're not talking that much just as well
the engine is so loud you can't talk or hear anyone except the guy standing next to you
we wait for the word to begin the assault but it doesn't come we continue circling beneath the
hot sun beneath breathing exhaust fumes staring at the island we want we want to know what for
Pete's sake is happening we wonder what they're when they're going to send us in and where
they're going to send us we wonder gosh how much longer can it go all like this a lot longer it
turns out nightfall one moment in the sun one moment the sun is above the horizon and their sky is
bright then the sun drops below the horizon in the dark that's how night comes in the
tropics no twilight this is on the on-hequator you see yeah boom it's gone yeah it's bright one moment
dark the next beijo isn't dark however beijo is on fire and the sky above it glowing red suddenly
it's morning see the problem is that the top command thought we'd already landed and really there was
just a lack there was all communications were disrupted so you guys are out there for so they didn't
know we're out there still circling didn't know it how much fuel does things have because you're
out there for twenty hours oh twenty hours yeah amazing not horrible yeah that's usually
Sunday it's morning the sun pops over the horizon and then there was light we're still
circling waiting for orders base you always still burning I was wondering how our boat can carry
enough fuel to circle how long is it 12 14 16 hours answer we float we were float for about 20 hours
our mouths dry our muscle stiff we feel haggard and cruddy some guys are sipping from their
cantines or nibbling on the rations although there's not much eating because we just aren't hungry
about five zero five thirty the LCVBA LCVP carrying our batai commander major major
warranties chugs along up next to our boat cupping his hands around his mouth and shouting to
make himself heard above the noise of the boat engines he says we're going in at red beach too oh no
and what what why was that why was that a bad thing we knew that that probably
some way we knew that that was where they haven't heard this time was on that beach
still shouting major haze assures us that red too won't be a problem the Japanese positions
on the beach have been eliminated he tells us and our landing will be unopposed you'll probably
go in standing up he actually said that so you said in the book he actually said I guess we were
completely surprised thinking back we were none of us really believed we'd go in standing up now
not that we think meet major haze is feeding us a line he's a good man he wouldn't do that
but it could be that he has been misinformed uninformed is more likely more like it totally
uninformed communications with the units ashore or deseray and several instances functionally
not existed the same goes for communications with general smith and his staff on the battle
ship Maryland the invasions fleet flagship this is doing large but charged measure to failure
of our radios which are too fragile to withstand the rigors of amphibious assault
I've got a walking talking strapped over my shoulder and it's a hunk of joke hunk of junk
I can't even communicate with the other boats which is why major haze had to come by in
but that's true what was that what was the fucking dog is what we're doing any good now the
officer in charge a red two at that time was Colonel Schupe the 10 of Colonel Schupe he became the
combatant later on years later in any event we're relieved the waiting is almost over the business
of riding around in boats is for the birds we want to get ashore and throw some punches I'm
standing in the battle of our LCVP behind me are 32 marines of my pertune most of them teenagers
most of them new to combat I look at them and they look at me I see fresh boyace facias
and wide-wired eyes staring out from beneath their brain their helmet brims their helmets
all seem a size too big accentuating their boyish making them look young as well most of them
really are their helmets jammed down on their heads the straps pulled tight under their chin you
can wear helmets this way so they don't fall off while you're clamoring down the cargo nets of
the troop transport into your boat the helmet is nothing more than a steel pot heavy and getting
heavier the longer you wear it if it falls off all you're on that net it could hit somebody beneath
you somebody could get hurt and that's when and that's not when marines are supposed to get hurt
not during the boating phase as it's called the phase of the operation when the emphasis is on
safety the getting hurt part the part where safety is one might say beside the point comes later
for us for me in the men in my boat that part comes now
did I say men well I suppose they are we call them men we treat them as men we expect them to act
like men they are after all united states marines but really their kids just out of high school
or not even that kids with rifles true kids trained to kill also true but kids never the last
just turn 17 many of them to use a term like that as long since fallen into general disuse their
youths a state of being between childhood and adulthood today's american mail at exercising
a lifestyle choice can often can and often does loiter for many years in that state but in the
mid-1940s in a world at war the state of youth tends to pass swiftly and do any disayet violently
the youth the kids on my boat have got a lot of growing up to do unfortunately they'll be
doing a hefty portion of that growing up in the coming minutes and hours in that period
far too many will undergrow all the growing up they will ever experience
these are the men that went in and I have a WRK written on all the casualties in this picture
and roughly half half her casualties going in
in that period
the youths the kids on my boat have got a lot of growing up to do unfortunately they'll be
doing a hefty portion of that growing up in the coming minutes and hours in that period many
far too many will undergrow all the growing up they will ever experience they will transition
with almost obscene dispatch from youth to adulthood to the grave
a beggio youth won't be served it will be served up and consumed literally in fire these youths will be
men only briefly and then they will be just a memory forever all of this sounds as if i'm a
grizzled veteran i am a combat veteran i fought in Guadalcanal earlier this year but the fact is i'm
just 23 years old still young and not all that grizzled in appearance or temperament practically
speaking though i'm the graveyard of this bunch same goes for the platoon sergeant who's about my age
where the tribal elders the warrior chiefs i'll lead my boys off the boat and the platoon sergeant
standing in the back will make sure they follow urging them and conjolling them yelling at them
maybe throwing a few choice cuss words whatever it takes to get them moving i'm watching my
boys as they watch me things begin to happen fast with the majors lzvp leading the way our boats
break formation one after the other and file off to our departure line this is an invisible line
about 6,000 yards offshore that runs parallel to the landing beaches when we get there our boats are
form up all the inline abreast arrayed like a cavalry squadron waiting for the bugle to sound
charge the coxons rev and gun the engines in neutral gear and the boats are rearing and
lurching trump charting at the bit it's as if the coxons are struggling to rain in war horses
that can't contain their eagerness for battle our boats engine is blasting the noise almost painful
to the years we're pumped up my men i and i i we're really pumped up the adrenaline is flowing
surging through us clutching our weapons looking over the side of the boat at the island breathing
hard thinking fast focused on the tastered hand stealing ourselves getting ready ready ready
here we go the signal is given our coxons shifts out of neutral pushes us all over the light brigade
but thinking right there yes yes and repeating repeating verbs as well you see
oh i'm ready ready ready ready ready ready ready ready ready yeah ready yeah
little literary yeah little little literary so that's that's that's that's the thank you behind
tip of the hat yeah here we go the signal is given our coxons shifts out of neutral pushes the throttle
wide open the engine bellows betch's belch's smoke the stern dips the men in the boat rock
back slightly as the boat leaps forward now we're barreling toward the island our boat all the
boat 600 men more less of the first battalion eight marines water churning boiling behind the boat
we're bucketing and bouncing bullying ahead with our squared off bow musseling the water aside
the boat is throwing spray soaking us and we're getting closer closer to the island
we're about 800 yards from the shore when zip zip zip we hear tiny objects flying past
and those aren't hornets boys their bullets we're in the range of the Japanese machine guns
and good gosh they're shooting at us we find this interesting bullets zipping by
splatting on the water surface splash splat here splat there splats to the left and right
splats in front of us look by golly there's some enemy fire hitting right over there look over there
that's me talking that's all of us talking talking and pointing at the impact circles in the water
little splats little dots where bullets hit people shooting at us fascinating
realizing that we could get our head shot off we ducked down and ducked down into the boat
the more bullets splatting into the water but none hit our LCVP we tell ourselves that those are
that most are 7.7 millimeter slugs which is what your basic light Japanese machine gun fires
and are nothing really much to worry about because they're too small to pierce even the thin
skined higgins boat that's what we tell ourselves all right but we really don't believe it
we know good and well that the Japanese are also shooting at at us with heavier automatic weapon weapons
big 13 millimeter machine guns and the even bigger dual purpose anti boat anti aircraft guns
which range in size from 37 millimeter to 77 millimeter and they're lobbying shells from 70
millimeter mountain howwitsers these weapons can and do inflict considerable damage on our
salt teams killing and wounded hunting hundreds of them disabling or destroying many amtrax and
LCVPs they're not my conceife concern however and never mind that they might at any second
blow us to eternity what really bugs me is being hunkered down in this boat where I can't see anything
I can't see where we are where we're going where we should be I can't observe the enemy fire
engage resistance we're likely to encounter I feel as if I'm going into battle blindfolded
this really stinks how can I do my job if I can't see anything how can I be sure the
coxin is taking us to the right place my men what are they thinking they're watching me
watching to see how I'm bearing up well I'm watching them too and for the same reason they look
okay check that they look grim and resigned but that's good grim and resigned look means they've
more or less accepted this situation which is also good because the situation isn't going to change
unless it changes for the worse this whole thing is on the rails it's a runaway train and there's
nothing going to stop it now if you know this if you accept it you can keep your fear under control
and if you can keep your fear under control you'll do your job you won't let your buddies down
so we're doing fine relatively speaking the boat is racing toward the shore when
crying scraping bottom metal grinding on coral it abruptly stops we're thrown forward cursing
we've run a ground all along the reef it's the same boat grinding to a halt on base
yours fringing reef I think what the heck the tide is supposed to be up the water deep enough to
allow the LCVPs to clear the reef we're 600 yards from the shore 600 long yards this just cannot be
wrong it can be it is though we're not aware of it where victims of the same disagreeable
title conditions that fouled up yesterday's landings this is as far as we go our cox and yells
we're going on mode his passengers are not happy there are exclamations of astonishment and protest
oh shit you gotta be kidding but he's not kidding yeah this is far as we go here repeats we're hung up
we've hit the reef you gotta get out here then he works the controls that release the cables that
hold the ramp up the cables which are still strong along the sides of the whole unwind with a
macaalic metallic rasp the ramp screeches as it opens drops splashes into the water and there
before us is basio in all its hideous glory not to exaggerate or overdramatize but it is a scene
from hell i mean one second we're looking at this slab of a metal ramp then the ramp drops and
we're looking at it in furno fire and smoke fill our bit frame of vision frame by the sides of the
bottom and the bottom of the boat orange fire red fire and black black smoke the fire is shooting
up the smoke is rolling curling climbing is fast and high the sky isn't high enough to contain it
you think we were looking at a volcano being born you wonder what could produce so much smoke
surely by now everything on basio that can burn has burned so where's all that smoke coming from
from the bowels of the earth it would seem from somewhere deep underground under the ocean
from the ever ever blazing furnaces of the world unless not forget the explosions there are a lot of
them explosions here they're everywhere fire and fire balls tongues of flame crimson and yellow flashes in
the smoke the time is 0-615 and some 600 marines are about to be launched or rather launch
themselves at basio codenamed Helen i'm at the front of the boat the lieutenant the platoon leader
time for me to lead a few seconds go by i was a few seconds ago i was deploying the limited
protection offered by the thin metal ramp now i'm deploying the lack of that limited protection
it was after all better than nothing which is what i've got now i kind of feel sick and i'm thinking
god why am i in this mess what am i doing here but i'm resigned to the situation i've got to
write it out no matter what happens no turning back now so the ramp hits the water and i run down
the ramp clutching my m1 carbine waving my guys forward shouting let's go i sense that my
manner hesitating by the pain no attention to them i jump into the water not knowing how deep it'll
be thinking that i might jump into a shell hole and go all the way under but i land on coral and sand
solid footing that's only five deep water relief and the water feels good that incredibly is my
first thought the water feels good it's calm and warm like bath water almost soothing a pleasant
contrast to the still cool morning air it's murky though sand and coral all stirred up beneath the
surface none of that crystalline purity that comes to mind when you picture a tropical lagoon
war comes to paradise and literally fouls it up i look sure word only 600 yards to go
now the fellow that reached down and pulled me up over the ramp here a few months ago
we ran across a photograph of him and what did it look like and a little bit of reference to
his family but never never made a contact now this is as of within six months or so ago
so this is and nobody and nobody else i talked to really knew who this guy was he was new to the
outfit he was the sergeant he was new so but nobody knew him at reunions didn't know him
so you look out there's six hundred and he and he and I were being lifted up by the
by the transport and a bat sabisid and a basket and remote and says it just as we were okay
just about up from the landing boat and in this basket taken a reason up to the transport itself
and i made a comment says looks like looks like we made it his comment was you made it you made it
and he died so you look down going back to this point when the ramp actually opens and you see you've
got 600 yards to go and just nothing but machine gun fire and as you said earlier the Japanese
you'd watch them storm forward without any ability to maneuver just only thing to do with the salt
and now here you are we are no maneuver in the exact same situation yeah we're in there saving
in completely at their mercy you say here 600 yards six football fields just under a third of a
mile if you run that distance on dry land unencumbered and unimposed you'll be gasping at the
finish line i don't care what kind of shape you're in we're in water and we're wearing and
carrying 60 pounds or more of gear and the Japanese are ripping us apart they've got an absolutely
clear field of fire and we have to walk straight into it when i returned and i looked i went
clear out there where i was hit and walked in and i saw remains of old carbines and so on down in
the sand we've got a walk not run because we're in the water remember walk slowly because we
can't run we can't even walk fast the marines are the world's experts in amphibious warfare the
core has been training for the past two decades to assault an established beach head on a hostile
shore it has developed complex doctrines to guide us in such endeavors at bayjio on 21 November
1943 all that training in doctrine doctrine has come to this we step out of our LCVPs into shallow
water and walk slowly across 600 yards with absolutely no cover whatsoever to make a frontal assault
on heavily fortified and defended enemy positions on my website just go to it by my name just
Dean Lad there is a poem in here called curtains of fire and it goes in a great detail similar
kind of words but done done a little differently and it's so that's where that's where it's all spilled out
you you say some training in some doctrine that they've been working on that's your quote
we cannot believe the volume of fire that's coming from the island the air is just filled with bullets
we can't see them but we can see where they hit splat splat splat like raime drops dotting the
water dot pattern sweeping back and forth across our line curtains a curtain of fire it's called
curtain of fire passing over us through us yeah I realize oh my god the Japanese have got this
reef zeroed in which means they don't even have to aim their machine guns they just lock the guns
to a predetermined setting and traverse the barrel left and right left and right just a lot
along the reef like shooting a fish in a barrel yeah yeah major haze was right he said we'd be going
in standing up and that's what we're doing not that we want to there's no other way no place to run
no place to hide some men crowds in the water they watch the bullet patterns the curtains trying
to figure out when the curtain will sweep over them it's all a matter of timing they'll duck
under water at the right moment to avoid getting shot it would be a good plan if only there were
two if only there were one or two machine guns firing at them but there are many many machine
guns firing creating multiple curtains that meet and intermingle an overlap and crisscross
yeah bullets are flying every which way worse the guns are aimed to fire just inches above the
surface so if you crouch with your head just above the water you're likely to get your head drilled
might as well stand up that way you'll get shot the chest or stomach which is usually fatal
instead of to the head which is almost always fatal also if you're crouching in the water you're
not moving and if you're not moving your stationary target and your easier to shoot you have to
keep moving you have to get to shore get a shore or die and the whole thing orders were don't
stop to help anybody everybody's going to get killed just you get sure stuff in my man that's
stop to help me violate those orders that told him don't wait for me go on no they they just took
a stick around walking straight into curtains of machine gun fires not something that comes naturally
your instinct's oppose it every fiber of your beam being seems screams in protest resisting
telling you no way it hell am I going to do that that's why when I glance over my shoulder to see
how my man are doing I see that I haven't that many haven't left the boat a few most likely those
that are just next to me in the boat are in the water but the others are bunched up at the top of
the ramp all tensed up to take the plunge but hesitating unable to make themselves move I can't
blame themselves for hanging back but I can't allow it for one thing they make a big fat target
standing they're crowded together at the front of the boat they've got to get into the water
and disperse before the Japanese machine guns find them and wipe them out with a couple well place
purse but more important they've got a job to do they've got to get off the boat get a sure
and fight and kill Japanese I gesture them and shout come on guys let's go get moving move out
they obey me they get moving they're good men the best they charge down the ramp jump
feet first in the water start waiting toward the shore and that's when the slaughter really begins
right away the men around me my men are taking hits and falling I'm very aware of this
I'm hearing cries for help cries for corpsmen the wounded are calling out corpsmen corpsmen I'm
hit I'm hit over here they're calling out as loud as they can I see men going under
often for the last time what do I do I keep moving forward that's what cries for help everywhere
and I ignore them I have to you get hot you get hit you just have to keep going you have to
cope with it yourself do the best you can hope for the best the sounds of battle are everywhere
there are those sweeping slashing curtains of fire dozens of machine guns rattling a
a cacophony of staccato hammering artillery shells exploding in the water splashing throwing up
washing gaizers of water and human body parts and most especially most memory the shouts and
screams of the wounded in the dying oh god I'm hit corpsmen over here corpsmen help me help me please
manner dropping everywhere to the left and right me falling and sinking into the water going
under some men don't cry out hardly make a sound when they're hit the bullet or bullets
thump into them they grunt and they're gone we're not permitted to help them the corpsmen can
come to the raid but but not the rest of us our orders are to move on to get to shore as fast as we can
if we stop the help the wounded will get shot too and we won't make it to the beach where we're
needed so we keep waiting forward my men my men from other boats the entire battalion what's
left of it struggling through the water holding the rifles over their heads pushing through
toward the beach and into the teeth of all that infillating gunfire they're courage is incredible
that world only begins to describe it insulating from that beach to British transport or ship
crossfire you guys are it yeah shells exploding washing gaizers machine guns rattling
splat splat splat those little dots in the water thousands of them moving this way and that
a bullet hits four feet to my right splat splat then bullets hit three feet two foot one foot to my
right sure do hope they skip over me and they do this time splat they begin hitting to my left one
foot two foot three foot and so on I got lucky I literally dodged the bullet several bullets how
long will my luck hold I can't see any muzzle flashes from the enemy guns the Japanese are invisible
just like their bullets we're being slaughtered by an invisible force nothing to see nothing to shoot at
not that we would be shooting if we could see them you don't stand an open water shooting at the
enemy you get yourself to the beach you take cover and then you start shooting anyway my weapon
isn't good for shooting at long and medium ranges for that matter it's not much good at close range
either it's an m1 carbine a pathetic excuse for a fire arm a weakling with a weakling punch
I'm holding it at port arms across my chest as I weigh through the water maybe there'll be a stop
maybe there'll be a maybe it will stop a bullet that would otherwise kill me that's about all the
good it can do me I walk on pushing forward straining to move faster the water drag me at my thighs
no one ever said a speed rucker record running in five deep water I've gone about 100 yards only
500 yards to go we're taking fire from the front from both flanks from the rear
the rear what the hell and that's what you talk about that's the that's the uh
uh sunken ship that's out there and there's well no no there are planes here now our planes
are coming in and strapping and we wonder what is going on of this when they were they were
strapping that ship I returned to the task at hand keep moving to the shore how long has
this been going on how long have been out here in the water I can't say I have no sense of time
everything is moving in slow motion second seems to last minutes minute seemed to last hours
it just keeps going on and on every moment is intense filled with intense thoughts emotions actions
I'm thinking how can I protect myself how can I protect my men someone screams another one of my
men is hit and another and another help corpsman some are killed outright some are wounded
some are well it's hard to say some go quietly some noisely they fall back in the water they
slip onto the water some flail in the water and they're paying in panic howling and shouting
I keep moving my adrenaline is flowing like an electric current through me allowing me to do things
I wouldn't normally and shouldn't normally do if I stop to think about what I'm doing I'd freeze up
I try to track the bullets the movement in patterns of the enemy's traversing fire the bullets
impact start to my left to my right the bullets sweeping back and forth I see no pattern
or rather I see too many patterns splat splat splat everywhere it's like the enemy throwing
thousands and thousands of stones at us a pattern of splats in the water comes towards me from the right
sweeps pass me continue to the left I don't hear the crack of the bullets as they zip by
its supersonic speed that's the problem they're not zipping past us they're hitting us they've got
our range I'm in the impact zone I have to get through it or die I turned to look back at my
men let's go I call out for the umpteenth time I turn facing this shore then finally it happens
a sickening splat like an inner tube being snapped across my abdomen slapping my bare stomach a sharp
staying sensation I'm hit I hear myself say a bullet is struck me nearly dead center below the
naval piercing me above the water line I'm gut shot one of the worst wounds of all oh god
I've probably been hit by small caliber machine gun bullet fired from straight ahead on the beach
it didn't make much of an impact not long enough to knock me off my feet or even stagger me
later I would learn to tour right through my body piercing my intestines later and goodness it didn't
hit a bone yeah so it pierced your intestines bladder and sacrum just before that
and an exited missing my spinal nerve by a quarter of an inch as it is I'll probably
die in a few minutes I'm scared I think my gosh this is it if it happens that you get shot
and you don't know how bad the wound it often happens that you get shot you don't know how bad
the wound is but when you're hit where I was hit you know it's bad it's a gut wound and you
know it's pretty sure thing you're not going to make it very few people survive gut wounds even in the
best of circumstances I'm in what are arguably the worst of circumstances if I had been shot on
try land I might be able to crawl to an aid station or my buddies might have passed me up but I'm
in a lagoon so there can be no crawling and my buddies are forbidden to help me it goes without saying
that there are no aid stations close by I can try to reach our LCVPs on the reef a hundred yards
behind me but I probably won't make it I'm dying is why I don't my gear into the water off goes my
pack my helmet my webbing the walkie talkie slung over my shoulder goodbye m1 carbine into the drink
you go never shot fired an anger it takes just seconds for me to shock my equipment in those seconds
I lose most of my strength after a few more seconds I'm almost too weak to stand it happens that
fast the energy is draining out of me I'm going into shock the weakness doesn't paralyze me and it
doesn't come from any place in particular it's an overall sort of feeling that makes me go heavy and
limp I'm in pain but it's not too bad not yet and I'm not bleeding very much either but I'm
slipping away no doubt about it my biggest worry now is that I'll collapse sink beneath the surface
and drown all I want to do is keep my head above water so I won't drown before I die from
the bullet that reamed through me I know this isn't rational what differences and make how I die
drowning or dying from getting my inner scrambled by a bullet either way I'm a garner and soon
but I'm not thinking rationally I'm thinking I've got to keep my head above water period maybe
10 seconds have passed since I got shot that is all in that time the man close to me
PFC Thomas F Sullivan has hastened to my side Lieutenant where are you hitting ass I tell him he pulls
up my Dungary jacket checks my wound so long as the puttons eight ball a nice guy just a teenager
but he's got a wild streak he's always getting in a trouble you can bet dollars to donuts when
he goes on liberty he lays the dick and gets arrested and afterwards spent a few days in the
brig is punishment this happened in New Zealand before we left for Tarrawer this happens everywhere
we go it's standard operating procedure for Sullivan you can put you can count on him to kick
up a road to put him in low key to mat for is I try to never good I know he survives a war oh
he definitely survives yeah and you're happy that right now he's the kind of guy that's rebellious
because he's dope diso-bang the orders which the orders are you keep going and he looks at you and
says no you know I thought as I got her so why why have somebody else die trying to help me
another guy joins him pft. Duffy also remember my petute and also with Tima Kiddoo does know how to
fall. When I returned this last time I found out where he was buried. Duffy yeah yeah
and you even say you'd think you'd be happy that these guys were staying with you but you're actually
thinking which is what they were disobeying orders and they were gonna lose their lives too.
And finally they say we're staying with you where do you want us to take you to the beach or to the
boat and you opt for the boat. Yeah. It takes about 10 minutes to reach the nearest LCVP.
The boats crowded with other wounded Marines other wounded men are being dragged to the boat by their
buddies. Evidently Sullivan and Duffy weren't the only one to ignore the order to ignore the wounded.
The wounded men and the rescuers are clustered in front of the ramp which is about three quarters
raised. One by one the wounded men are half pushed half flung over the top of the ramp after which
they rolled down onto the deck my turn comes. The man next to me is that big fellow with the
ravaged face. His wounded is terrible worse than mine. I motion for him to go before me. He is boosted
up to the top of the ramp. Sullivan lifts me up. I'm groaning like mad. The pain is getting worse.
I'm really hurting really bad now. My helpers can't quite get me over the top. I'm limp and heavy.
A bulky sack of flesh and bone with a hole in it and they just can't manage to raise me high enough.
That's when the Marine with the ravaged face performs his life saving deed. One army me into the boat.
How did he do that? He must be in torment from his wound but that didn't stop him from helping me.
I tumble groaning down onto the dock alongside the man with the ravaged face. The deck is covered
with the main and wounded men. Their bodies bandages and bloody many writhing and pain.
Many just groaning just like me. Another wounded man is taking aboard. The ramp is then
closed and the boat begins to move. The coxon aware that our lives are hanging. The balance
opens. The throttle wide and soon we're going full tilt racing through the channel in the barrier
reef toward the Sheridan. This description I think is the best description I've ever heard of
of that kind of combat. Well, yeah you take a scene of small line. Your line burger is
he's increasing credible. He does a lot of writing. He worked with
a guy handed up the Chicago Tribune. He worked with him regarding the army unit that was
in more or more too. Then he wrote this about the Polish woman that was in the Jewish woman.
That was survived the time that they were almost killed. It's incredible.
That's the end of the tunnel of battle for you. Lasted what? 20 minutes? I guess 20 hours
in 20 minutes because you did the first 20 hours circle around. You give a great account
from all the people that were there that got interviewed.
The next time he's pushing in the fighting at taro. It's really all taking place at this sea wall.
Later on, later on he was in the motorcycle officer in the LA. He's been in accidents and
shot at it. He hospitalized 20 times. Oh my gosh. Yeah, these guys getting a sure a few
seconds later, dick steps a sure. This is what you're being loaded down the Sheraton.
Yes. Momently loaded. He said to himself, well, they ain't going to give me now.
Then he looked around in his elation evaporated nearby, led dead marine with a Japanese bayonet
protruding from his chest and three dead Japanese soldiers sprawled around him. Dead bodies were
everywhere floating in the water, piling up at the waterline, strewn about the beach.
Guys from the second marine to a landed the day before. Guys from the eighth marine's too.
And many Japanese, the beach was strewn with rifles as well as bodies and he took one off of the
dead marine and took the man's ammo clips as well. Now he could fight back. And then another
guy named Hester, Hester, collected his men and led them back to the sea wall. They found the perfect
example of taking leadership. This Hester called Big Hester. What happened with him? Well,
he's able to gather people together and they let go. That's the guy is not how much
it's on Mars. I say about him. I mean, there were two brothers. One brother was killed. His younger
brother was killed on Guadalcanel, but the time when I was killed. Well, you start talking here
about him and Hester and then Murdoch. Yeah. And he said, Hester, they found Murdoch near a wrecked
damn track in the mad rush to reach the sea wall and jump over it. Duffy somehow got separated
from the group and they never saw him again. Never saw him. He was killed. The guy that saved
your life sitting with his back the wall taking a breather dick looked over the cord the shore
immediately behind Murdoch. The incoming waves washed the dead marines onto the shore and pushed
them into small piles. It looked like a little mound and at the top of that mound facing the
sky was Anthony Boyle. His helmet was off in the top of his head. He was shot on the ground.
On that same oil. A number of years ago, Murdoch, I and another one or two, went to a big
memorial for him in New York. Overlooking the Hudson. And we had one Lieutenant General
Boomer was with us and he was one of the spokesman for the fighting in the jury involved in.
He was a guy and the main guy. So he was there with us. But we had a big ceremony in a big
Catholic church. We had a parade downtown. So the downtown was a big event. And this is what
happened to him. That's what happened to him. Is. Yeah. Only seconds before Oboil had been standing
next to Murdoch period over the world. Then a Japanese bullet took off the top of his head and he fell
back into John's arm. John created Oboil in his arms for a long moment before laying him gently
aside. Someone else must have hauled him up to the pile of bodies at the water's edge to get away
from the wall. During this time, someone from the company passed Dick's position and informed
that Duffy had been killed. Duffy was a very quiet person. Never talked to him much, but it really
nice to hear. Dick remembered. He was a little older than the most of us in his earlier mid-20s,
which made him an old man in our outfit. He was Oboil's best buddy. Now they were both dead
killed within minutes of each other. For everyone involved Americans, Japanese, there's a peculiar,
peculiar nasty way to fight a war. The situation favored the defenders, but only two
appoint battles are won, not by staying in fortifications that are won by attacking. And on
Baygio, the Marines, we never saw the enemy. Because they were there soon, he had to hear from
a, from a whole out of a hole somewhere. They had to assault each and every Japanese position,
making short rushes across open ground through murderous fire. Heavy casualties were the result,
but ultimately, Japanese casualties were heavier. In fact, almost total. The Japanese would not yield
because their military ethos forbade it to beat them. You had to kill them. But the Marines
would not quit, and they could not be stopped. Against the foes, such as the Marines with their
absolute determination and capability to win, the initial advantages enjoyed by defenders fighting
from a concealment could have won outcome. A annihilation. Now I have a, I have a book here written
by one of the Japanese defenders. And I wanted to meet him when I went there and met two other
Japanese officers. But we never, we never, we never actually able to get together. We were on a
phone. But the name, the name we were called, I'll see what they called, called Heavenly,
something rather. They believed that I went to a heaven too. There's a different kind of heaven.
And they died. Continuant all of this. Yes, yes, a coney shrine for one place.
OK. You know, the officers, especially, we will be again in the S. Coney shrine.
And this one officer that I met on Guadalconeo and who I got in a real well, we
we of course, minor for about 15 years. And talked a lot about the, I learned a lot about their,
their whole background of their Bouchito code. No, let's talk.
I've read on this podcast. I've read some of letters that the Kamakaze pilots would write.
Because they would write a letter before they would go and die. Yeah. And, and there's also,
there's also talk of how like they would write these letters. But some of them were not writing
from the heart. Yeah, what? And as they, when they, when they die, sometimes they would cut off their fingernails.
And that would be sent back. Now, this one, this one, one fellow who had just been killed,
he was in a go for like hole, who just starting our final drive. And that's where I,
I got the diary from him and the thousand, whole, a stitched belt. And all that kind of stuff.
And anyway, I had the, I had a little, little piece of part of a hair that had long to
think and long to his, his girlfriend or something. Anyway, I just want to send all that back.
And that, when, when the, when the soldier was killed, the life, and that would have been his wife.
The wife is supposed to take care of his family. Instead, she had remarried. She felt bad about it.
When she saw this, saw what he had written, but one of her remarried. What did you understand me?
Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
Again, jumping ahead a little bit, because people need to get the books, they can read it for themselves.
But the casually told was nothing less than catastrophic. The New Zealand, the company,
had been beefed up into a little more than 200 men to give it an extra punch in the assault.
90 were lost, killed, or wounded in the Bayesian Lagoon. In other words, nearly half the company was
out of action before anyone stepped ashore. The men Murdoch found on the beach were all exhausted.
And with the terrible look on their face, that's according to Murdoch. But their shocking
exhaust did not could not concern him. What I was more interested in was who's alive and who I
have I got. What have I got? To make that assessment, he continued rounding up the guys in the beach
and taking them back to his area.
All the wild Vietnamese fire was flailing on the beach, John ignored it. When Anthony
Oboil was shot and fell into his arms, he wasn't faced. And once he laid Oboil,
Oboil's twitching body aside, he didn't think about him anymore that day. He didn't have time,
much less the inclination to grieve for Oboil or to feel horror for the slow,
hideous way of all of that. See at that point of time, our battalion, especially our company,
led by Murdoch, were wiping out the last resistance. It was a hard, it was really a
real determined group fighting there. And that's where we lost right now. One of the people
that's in this picture here, he got shot by fellow down in a hole like a little spider hole
where he caught. And up in his gut killed him instantly. He died thinking that he died, thinking that
I'd be just been killed. I visit his family in Tennessee afterwards and they were still so sad that
they didn't even want to hear more about it. Didn't even want to talk to me about it. Progress is
eventually made toward the middle of the day, Bill noticed that seems things seem to be going a
little bit better for the Marines. They seem to be making some progress. Bulldozers had landed by
that. And they pushed up against the pillbox entrances, sealing them and intuming the Japanese
inside. But the flame throwers really did the trick. A flame thrower on. So one of those
that was inside, I ran into the first time returned, first time I returned to Terala. And he had been
been in the Navy for many, many years, probably a little over 20 years. And he was in charge of the
mess area. And then he had been transferred from there to New Guinea just before we landed. That's
why how he survived. Oh, so he so just before he landed, he had been transferred. Yeah, he had been
gone. Well, he, you know, maybe a month before some period of time. Right, right. That's the only
reason. So he wrote that. So now here he is, he returned, same time, I'm idea, and I met him,
you know. And I showed him the picture of the one, the one, the Japanese soldier that, what they
do with they put, they put their toll in the, and pull the trigger of the rifle, and point
it right up there, I've got him out. And he was doing that. And he saw that. And he, the reaction
from there was already something. It was for you something. And he saw that picture, he says, yeah.
Yeah, there's been a lot. Man. Here's what here's what Murdoch says as the, as the fighting kind of comes to
an end. As they get to the end, all of a sudden things began to move. We were moving, but very,
very slowly like a snail. My guys would go out ahead of me. Then they'd be moving and I'd run up
with my gang and get behind them. We were all very close. The enemy, a matter of feet, not yards. It
was small, very slow progress. But it was progress nonetheless. For the first time since they landed
the day before, the men of B company were advancing and not falling back after each forward push.
The Japanese meant to fight to the last man, and they were coming ever closer to realizing that
goal. Marine assault teams mostly add hawk assemblages, destroyed the enemy bunkers one after
another, killing the Japanese while they're inside, or when they ran out, the Japanese were
literally slain in heaps, as their numbers were reduced, so as the volume and intensity of their
fire. Finally, when John and his men in advance as far as they could, the battle just sort of
Petered out. The shooting stopped bringing silence to their sector of the battlefield and leaving
everyone stunned by the abrupt end to the fighting. They didn't know quite what to do, we just kind of
sat there and did nothing. The next day, first battalion marched over to the pier where the LCVB
waited to take them back to the Sheridan. On their way, they witnessed a dual flag raising ceremony
for the stars and stripes in the British Union Jack with a representative from his Majesty's
government presiding. The stars and stripes went up first, but the Union Jack was given the place
of pride and honor on a higher pole and acknowledgement of the British sovereignty over the Taroa
toll. There were some muddled complaints for the men of the one eight, but not much.
Most just smiled grimly and shook their heads. Great Britain may have held the title to Bejio,
but the Marine Corps truly owned it. Well, I recurrent the first time.
I recurrent the first time in 82 and I stayed with missionaries there for a couple of days or more.
Then during that time, we all decided to, okay, there was the breakaway and that church group.
Part of it is going to another church just a thatch type of a place and walking hand walk through
some kind of a jungle area to get there. They had it, we sat down and I spoke and asked him to
sing and they just loved to sing. And then it's not, you got to sing the Marine Hill.
Then what happened was I didn't really sing it. I said, now we'll sing it. The words, I mean,
we'll sing the tune of it. It was a love song based on a hymn. It was kind of two iterations of
apparently and then I had to then I told him a little bit about, well, you know, that's interesting.
And I said, down, these words and I went through the words to a certain extent.
Well, that was so interesting. But here they sang that song that was the love song. Like
same as our Marine Hill. Oh, then after that, I invited him over to the other church that they
had spent off from and I had got a hold of the film that was done by a government norm hatch.
He was recently died away. He's one took all these pictures. Come back photos. It was
inverted by the way. And anyway, I played that for them and it showed that flag rising and these kids,
they all scythe and the Marine Hill flag and they were real quiet. The British flag one just like
was described in here. Here's the results. The battle for Bayesian lasted 76 hours. Some 4,690
Japanese troops, about 97% of the garrison died. A mere 17 Japanese were taken prisoner
as were 129 laborers. The second, these most of these were Korean laborers. Yeah. The
second Marine Division suffered 3,407 casualties of these 1,150 Marines and sailors were killed
in another 2,292 were wounded. These Salt units lost 41% of their men dead and wounded.
The first Patanian 8th Marines lost more than 30% of its men just getting to the beach.
There's probably, there could be as many as 400 still there. Three or 400,
still there, because they're under homes under park and lots and so on. Overall, the battalion suffered
343 casualties on their naked. When I was there, the third time. And here the archaeologist
was brushing about brushing off the bones and on this one person, no, that and two of the two of them
they found wedding rings on their, something huh? And I saw that as they were doing it. Yeah.
casualties in my platoon were 12 killed and 15 wounded, including myself 75% of its original
strength, most were hit while waiting to shore. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. And you can look at the faces of all
these that were killed in this one photograph. And you talk about the news clipping,
sort of the news stories that were reported about Taram. Yeah. Okay. And part of it, I always was told
that they released some of these, it was the first time that they really released a lot of
events. It's a very, very long one that one that general public realized, you know, this is not going
to be easy. This is what it's really like. Just terrific combat photos, home and credible.
Yeah. And those were the first ones showing mass casualties in my arrogance. Yeah. You, you've
probably seen that one. Oh, yeah, I've seen it. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah, Norm Hatch. Just wanted to do that.
Oh, so that is him. Okay. Norm Hatch. Oh, yeah. I got no real well. Yeah.
All right. And in the end, we just read this book, I published, was there's a Colonel Alexander,
Joseph Alexander died the last, in the last year for years. Anyway, he was the, he was the
prime historian for the Marine Corps. And, and then he was very well thought of
the name of the list to press. So when it came to making a proposal to enable us to press,
it had to go through their, uh, through their border review scene. And then after that, no, I
seen that. It had to go through, it had to go through your, when it, what's the word for it?
Somebody has the same, same mountain as you do. I pretty much, anyway, this Joseph Alexander
was one of the prime ones that did, did, did it when my peer review. Okay. And then when that,
so that when that got to the, to the review board, oh, he says, fine. So I'd just say,
you're laying on through, you know. And then now, my book was on the first ones to go on as
an ebook, first ones for the press. And I have the ads or some of the, the, the, the proceeds magazine.
Yeah. That shows, shows that they're displayed. One of them is with, uh, with Papay going to,
is on that same page with him. Well, yeah, this is available on ebook for those of you that
want to get it, and can't wait to get it. You get immediately. Just go straight to ebook.
Not only that. Yeah, that too. And not only that. When they go through, and it goes through, and it
goes up, going through email, I read to, uh, what's, what is it, uh, Amazon.com. It'll be delivery,
you know, matter about three days or less. And, and, and, no, no shipping costs.
Yeah, that's the way Amazon works. Oh, it's an amazing deal. I do. I don't understand. Yeah. And,
I don't know if there's, there's, but that's where I got my copies. So, yeah, you can get, I have
the hardcover and the softcover. Yeah, both. Yes. I don't play around with the music. You know,
when you get ebooks, they cost three versus three quarters of much as a, uh, one of those. Yeah.
That's, the publishing world is very strange. Taking it now to where you get onto the
Sheridan. So now this is, this is, uh, no sooner than my stretcher touched down on the Sheridan's deck
that I was west away into the operating room. I was one of the first wounded marines to be treated
and the medical team was fresh and rested and ready to go to work on me. I guess that qualifies as
a stroke of good luck. Even better fortunate awaited me in the operating room in the form of
lieutenant commander Lloyd Sussex formally an abdominal, an abdominal specialist at the Mayo Clinic.
Now the key member of three-man team, Dr. Two doctors in a corpsman that would say,
there you go. How lucky is that you had a guy. Unbelievable. And, I'm part of the shift.
And that's all there was. And if I gone unsure, I would have died. And most other places you,
you wouldn't have an abdominal specialist. And then it says the operation last about an hour.
I was conscious the whole time and didn't feel any pain. No, they didn't want their put me out because
I died. I was in shock. And the doctor spent most of that hour bent over my lower body.
And although I could not see what they were doing, I could hear a little clicking and
sniffing sounds made by their instruments as they worked. They repaired my bladder and removed
a portion of my large intestine and gave me a blood transfusion. Then they closed my wound and that was
that. Yeah, and didn't need a half of a bay of afterwards. I had made it through surgery. But
he'd been a close call. Dr. Sussex told me that I could not have survived another two hours
because of the toxins that were building up inside. And that right after the right after the
operation I was kept in a hot, covered tent. And it was miserable. I kept trying to shove it off
they had they had a carman sitting there with me all night long to keep me even throwing it off.
And then another couple of days I was able to walk into the watch and move me with their
blood. People couldn't be here. I was walking in there to see the movie. They couldn't believe it.
I mean you were as good as dad. Got shot in. Unbelievable. Not even to the beach yet.
Yeah, they had very people survive period. I got shot. Very few. Because he told me he said
I talked to him later and said, yeah, you know the poison in your system. You wouldn't
you wouldn't have lasted another couple more. No hour or two that was it. And here's up in an hour
about an hour or an hour or an hour after I was hit. I was just unbelievable.
There's unbelievable. You say a few days later I was checked over by a younger doctor, a gloomy
fellow with a bit with a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a match. You told me don't flu that my wound
was very serious and that I wouldn't live much past my 50s. Yeah. Well, sort of doctor says such
that they do his patients. I reported his words to Dr. Soxix, who's who's appalled.
He shouldn't have told you that. Soxix said and there's no truth through it anyways. And I guess
we're improving that right now. Soxix, if you're talking about it. Well, now what happened to him?
A year later he was operating on a guy at Ferregette Naval Training Center. This is Soxix.
Yes. And here he's about 55 years old. He died of a heart attack. He was
operating on that guy. And I've talked, I've talked in Mayo Clinic about that. And then
there's people that are written up a lot of history about that. They written a little bit about
Sussex. And I gave a lot of information too. But so anyway, that's this end of the story all with him.
In, uh, lad, like you said, you come walking up their plane of moving.
Yeah. Yeah. You know, the best that you come walking about up my buddies could hardly prove
believe their eyes. Oh my god, look, here's lad. They did the exclaimed.
Yeah. Yeah. First they thought I was dead. Then they were told those grieves he wounded all
to her up a basket case. And now here I was walking into the movie theater. How many days
it have been? It couldn't have been more three days. Oh, man. Uh, while I was
really, you know, all was in a hospital. They must get around. It's fast as possible. Anyway.
Okay. Yeah. While I was recovering from my surgery, John Murdoch dropped by to give me a
samurai sword. He had survived. He had proven near to unbezier. Yeah. Hold it from me until I returned.
He said he assumed that I'd gotten a million dollar wound. It would be sent home. I thought the same.
Left unspoken, but implicit and what he said was that he didn't think you'd be coming home.
The sword was probably mine to keep. Yeah. He was, it was, his was a common sentiment.
I would venture to say that after Taroa, most second division Marines didn't believe
they would make it through the war. Yeah. Because you're looking at the entire rest of the island
campaigns and then you got to go into mainland Japan. And it's going to be a bloody fight the
whole way. Oh, boy, if they had that bomb had not dropped. It's horrible saying, but gee. Murdoch took
a head count of B company using a pretty battle roster for reference checking off one name after
the other from the list. He had known that the toll would be large, but even he was shocked by the
final count. My god, he thought. Now that the chasms are listed or they're listed in there.
We've not there listed. They're listed in here all the casualties. What's the name of the guy that
uh... Yeah, they're not fully listed in here. What's his name uh... wrote the book, the story of
the story of the battle. What's it? What is it? Anyway, I've got that whole thing.
They're all listed in here. One's wounded. One's it killed out right. Now this is his book by the
way right here. See? That's the right here. Here, that book. Sure, what? Okay. Sure,
right. Okay. No, you know, all of the names are all back here. So here they are. If you
know, they're all back in here. See this? Got it. See that? So that's where they all are.
And I talked to him in person and uh... it's getting okay, you know, to quote him.
And I said, well, I have a little difficulty with uh... with the uh... publisher.
Mm-hmm. Just don't pay any attention to them. So I'm giving you the okay. All right.
Now you guys sail to Hawaii. So you go from you go from this hell. How
longs take you to Hawaii? Like 20 weeks? 20 weeks? 20 weeks? 20 weeks?
So then you guys get to Hawaii. You guys are pure side. You're all sitting up there looking
pure side and a car pulls up and here we go back to the book. Outstept Admiral Chester W. Nimitz,
Commander in Chief Pacific Fleet and Pacific Ocean Air. He's getting to ascend the gangway
a company by an aide. His friends called him Chet. So did the Marines. The nuclear
experiences had given them the right. He chet, they shouted. When we go back to the states,
Chet, we can't wait for the Golden Gate. Does our skipper know the way to day go?
How about some liberty, Chet? We got to get off this tub and do some Christmas shopping.
And perhaps most tellingly, hey Admiral, get us someone who knows the reefs for our next landing.
So that's that's why. And then his driver, then the same...
Mark said his driver's seat. Oh yeah, you see, you guys you look like some
Hollywood guy. Yeah, you look like Hollywood guy. So that's Chet's remarks,
Marty. Yeah, you guys must have been pretty away. But anyway, for sure.
Hard to control a couple off of taro. So anyway, he was, he was so glad to say these guys here.
So they're just full of it. Great. That's good. Yeah. And so here we go. Shortly after Nimitz
departs. The PA announced that the shared would be proceeding directly to the big island.
In other words, no liberty on a wahoo. This didn't set well with the Marines.
And they went wild hooting and yelling and whistling, throwing all matter of junk down on the
dock, pelting the band and the short patrol. The band's been lowered. Their instruments
and accompanied by the short patrols fled to a nearby shed. The eighth Marines achieve nothing
with their show of angry emotions, except perhaps to blow off a lot of steam and confirm to all
concern parties that they should not have been given liberty. The rest was not about the turn.
These barbarians loose on the civilian populace of a wahoo. The civilized world wasn't ready
for us. And to be honest, we weren't ready for this. And like, whole life is concerned.
What, all I've got to do is Japanese. What are you going to do? And there's a lot of Japanese.
It was just as well. The brass had plans for us. The second division as a whole.
And these did not involve a return to the United States. First, we would go to the big island
to rest rebuild and then train for them. And we had to put up the tents.
There was no face to sleep. So they sent you guys out at the middle of a wahoo.
No, no, no. This is this is a big island. They sent you out at the middle of it where you
guys had to establish your own base camp. Oh yeah, yeah. We had to set up the tents and start training.
Oh, yeah. You get here. You get the stuff out. And then after that, the camp was used by the
others that eventually took Ewasima. Okay. You say here, you get the camps set up. You get a little
bit of downtime. And then they get you guys right into training. Our training stress to combine
norms approach to warfare for veterans of Bayesian and Guadalcanal many aspects of this training
world. But the replacements in the division we were receiving was receiving almost daily.
They needed all of it. Replacements are going to be in the Guadalcanalcino area. And we knew
we were going to use the tanks. And we knew that we were going to have to have communication
by a phone and the back of the tank. Okay. Yeah, this was a new modification. It was a new
new home. Yeah, home to the Hadoan maneuver around the strong points at all. You say that most
of the replacements, most were fresh, fresh teenage, fresh, and so on. Now we're starting to get
trapped. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. That's what you say here. Yeah. Eager kids with no combat experience and no
idea what they got themselves into. The rest of us just looked at them and shook our heads. We
did know what they had gotten themselves into. And we wondered how they would survive in the battles
to come. Never forgetting that our own survival thus far was due in large measure to the vagaries
of chance and circumstance and maybe just a little bit to the grace of God as well.
Luck in God's grace, we're desperately slim reads on which to hang our hopes,
slimmer still for the replacements because they're in experience. We expected that many would die.
The odds were against them because they had seen no action. But we also expected to die.
The odds were against us because we had seen too much action. Either way, you did the math.
It came out bad. Yeah. And it's the war went on for another two years. Yeah, you're a
hundred percent figure, you know. Yeah. Your chance of security. Yeah. Your percent. Yeah.
We were, oh, here you talk about the drafties. We were especially skeptical about the
skeptical about the drafties of which there were significant number. These were selective
service Marines were something new to which was previously an all-volunteer force, new and unwanted
and a matter of grave concern for the rest of us. Would the drafties measure up to Marine Corps
standards? Would we be able to depend on them in battle? We had our doubts. We were wrong to doubt
them in battle when the chips were down. They proved that like volunteers, they were worthy
be called Marines. So you eventually take over a as a 60 millimeter mortar section. Yeah, because
I'm still weak because you're still hurt. Yeah. And so I didn't have to get out and do a lot of
moving around, you see. And then, again, you cover some of this stuff in good detail on the book,
but then soon enough, it's your hit and cyber. I learned how to load this ship and
be a court recorder and all that kind of stuff. Like do these stuff? How long were you guys in Hawaii
for? Let me think about about six months, five months. Yeah. So you get five, did you get any
liberty at that time? Oh yeah. Okay, so they let's go. Yeah, we were down a heel a lot. Okay. Yeah.
Nice. Yeah. All right. So now you get done with that and then boom, morning, 15 June,
1944. Shells rained down on our salt waves. This is Sipan. Yeah, but not before we left Hawaii.
We had our LSTs all lined up, Sipaside. And one of them blew up a mortar shell or something
that we were doing some welding or something. Anyway, I'm Mercy, I'll blew up. And then
fires have spread from ship to ship. And we lost, I don't know, maybe could four or four hundred
men would lost their lives. Yeah. And that whole lineup there. That's it. And then we lost a lot of
equipment because of that. Did that set back the operation? Yeah, it did. It did put us, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So now that was in a place called Westlock. Yeah. You probably heard about that
when Hampshire. Yeah, no, and you've got a written, I did. I heard for it about because they
made changes to the way that they did business with regards to handling. Now this happened,
this happened when we were at Lenny exercises on Maui. And I think we had some, we had some
complications at Lenny do that whether something was. And so that was part of it. I, that was part
of it. But the main thing, they don't know exactly what caused the explosion, but they think
it probably was. What's what I just mentioned. Yeah. But guys got blew up and just got flying out.
And one of my friends seems he had happened to him and he was swim, swim, no, he was picked
up by bolt came by and had it pulled a line. So grab on. And then just drag them over to the beach,
you know. It's incredible. It's crazy. These vets from Gualdo Canal and Tarowen and then
de Paris and that was unbelievable. Yeah. But you push it back, I guess. And then you guys had
this iPad. And here we go, June 15, 1944. Sheels rained down on our sole waves kicking up tall
columns of water. Now can you imagine landing on side pan? They had all of our cheerrails set
on the west side of the mountain. Fire over at us. All zeroed in on the reef and along the beach.
All they had to do was just break back and forth. And we could even show you. And we lost so many
all of wounded. Our wounded were all going back and then here they got hit by all this archery
fire. And our pertain, a lot of what pertain commanders were wounded and killed. Because
there were our main our CPs were wrecked along the beach. And then our ships couldn't fire back
at them from that angle. They had to go clear around the outside of the island and hit them from
the river. That's what happened. Yeah. You say here are not only that. They had to spot her
on a smoke stack and it's sugar refinery. And all that was called in. Just perfect. Perfect. Yeah.
To my friends were killed right there in the beach. One led to death. Yeah, they're a lot
other. The same way. Basically it. Yeah. Yeah. This is what Murdoch said about it. Our amtrax
were in line to breast and we were taking our telefired. The heaviest we ever encountered.
Yeah. You could see the shells hitting the water exploded. Yeah. Making the water splash way up.
Just off to my right shell, scored a direct hit on one of my boats and pow, it just went to pieces.
There was a flash and a big explosion. I could see pieces of men flying out of it. I thought, oh shit.
But I also thought thank God it wasn't my boat. But I was mostly thinking who was it that got hit
and how many guys am I going to be without? Man Murdoch was a serious like marine combat leader.
Yeah. He got there too. Hit there too. And this is this is your this is you say this is your
experience. When my amtrax reached the reef we were all crouched low below the sides. There was
too much metal flying around the air to risk popping up for a look around. The guys had their heads
pulled down between their shoulders and they stared at each other with eyes. We big eyes and said nothing.
The veterans of Taro had been through this before and were probably having a harder time of it,
precisely because of their prior experience because they knew how bad things could get.
The new kids were mostly better off because they didn't have a clue.
Certainly they were scared but they were also fascinated and awestruck by all the noise and
commotion and these emotions blunted their fear. Nothing in their experience had prepared for them
for this. The live fire exercise in Hawaii were puny by comparison and so they did not realize
that our situation was terrible and likely to get worse. You can be sure that I was scared but
fortunately I had the concerns of an officer to distract me. What wave were you and what group were
you in? There was so many with ahead of us on the beach I landed on. We were way on the northern
end of the landing beach and what happened is the tide of her was forces further way to the left
and we had to realign a couple hundred yards further back to right again. Now thing is there's
we didn't have a lot of problem getting into the beach but once we got to the beach there
was nobody on the beach so they didn't defend themselves at the beach instead it was a heavier
artillery fire so they landed basically you landed through but where I was we had to cross a
fighter strip that they had so we had to cross and that was kind of scary going across that
exposed from people shooting out of the side but then as we maneuvered kept moving to the right
further to get back where we were supposed to be then the heavy artillery fired just all over
the place it was just cannon wound him or um yeah you said so many good men were killed that day
one of them was first lieutenant new old teacher yeah he was a four-year school teacher
former school teacher you know when I went on one on the I'm never did together a lot in
New Zealand yeah shell fragment sliced off one of his legs no country be found to help him yeah he
did it died no other than the same time oh yeah that's his from moral artery pumped the last of his
blood on to the sand he looked up at those gout around him and whispered get them in off the beach
yeah yeah yeah because more the fire was coming in we're on the same time John we saw these guns
by the way when we return up there those guns are still up there two of them are and now it's
it's a Japanese memorial and that these are part of the memorial up there yeah I I mentioned to you
that I was just saying I'm too this is right above a physical sandbass city in the city yeah
right up there I don't know if we I don't know specifically because no I don't know I don't know
talk of that hill as you get it was a big night above on the top now it'd be just in the
North towards Shepard shell yeah it's just that that's where the that's where these these are
this artillery is however and then then down to the left there's the monsters monsters that
dig out of where they they got the coral the coral gravel or sand to make the airport with
now that all got filled in with Japanese tanks and and and the amphibian tractors they're all buried
right in there you probably didn't see it because it's all been buried but I got a picture picture
I mean one book here I want to look like before they recovered up so I was here when when
your friend knew was it new no no you said around the same time John Murdach John Murdach was
running up the beach after disembarking from his amtrak came across Gus Kriger Kriger
of one of B company's veteran first we tendons in a close friend he's who was lying on the ground
I've got his picture here yeah his body perforated by shrapnel he was alive but just barely
John now beside his friend I looked at him to see what I could do for him John recall but he was
bleeding and so many places I knew I couldn't do anything he wanted to cigarette so I gave him one
I let that form and I said Gus you'll be okay I got to go I had to go there was too much to
do I had to get the company organized and I left him there so he died there I've visited his wife
back afterwards he was later lost within the span of a few minutes John had lost two of his
season to put two leaders also wounded and put out of action were the second and third battalion
commanders we tend to crumble Henry P. Jim Crow you heard him and Jim Crow yeah legendary
he was the former commander of the scout sniper school that you did and also we
tended John Miller, Lieutenant Colonel John Miller so both the battalion commanders out of
action yeah from that artillery yeah man yeah you're again you know it looks
sort of hopeless so that's stage just seeming hopeless here we're catching heavy artillery fire
and we couldn't do anything about it you know it's it's I like I like bringing up these points in the
book where you talk about things like this while that's all that's happening you say meanwhile
I lay in the brush with my man and try to free myself from the despair that suddenly gripped
me the situation seemed hopeless it was Tarua all over again how I wonder do we gonna get out of
this mess exactly my feelings at that time and then you say the feelings soon passed I just didn't
have time for it at my command we moved out everyone rose from their shell holes and craters
and went forward no hesitation imagine from the bushy strip we lumbered about 10 feet to the
air strip keep going keep going ahead myself shouting don't stop it's good I like to bring
those points up because there's several times where you talk about you as a leader have to kind of
get yourself together and and I think what that's helpful for for is young leaders in the military
that are gonna feel that same thing if they get into tough situation okay you got to recognize it
and then you got to take action young 23 year old with all that responsibility I got so then
next day I got got strapped off my own motors hit hit the leaves up above us and went off
I didn't report it it just I got entered entered up and there's still air or there goes still there
I didn't report it yeah you guys are pushing forward and then you guys get kind of a
a skirmish line and then the Japanese counterattack several points along our line
Don mains he recalled this they bonds out across the gas dang swamp and we just shot him up
the swamp was marshy water and you remember it's a physical suicide he likes a
super I don't remember it's a swampy area and what happened is one of the other officers
in our battalion he was like a soldier for a type of a guy and he'd been with a pretty
state army as an ambulance driver and north Africa and we just figured well he's either going to be
a hero or he's gonna get killed one the other and he got killed what happened was that that
we were we're at this spot and there are a lot of Japanese on the other side not exposing himself yet
but he's trying to get it he walked out of head trying to get him and exposing himself he thought
they were he getting him a surrender and instead this one guy being over had received him
and strapped his back killed him yeah a lot of guys a lot of casualties and and actually
at this point there's another casualty and it's a guy by the name of John Murdoch and this story
is about as good of a story as I've ever heard about the military as a whole so here we go this is
around this time John Murdoch also became a casualty hit while landing B company hit while
leading B company on a sweep west of the landing strip down toward Sharan Konoa yeah
Sharan Konoa and this is so this is John Murdoch now it's called it's really is a
shalin shalin Konoa they couldn't they couldn't pronounce they couldn't fence their
are so we call Sharon Konoa so here's John Murdoch talk in fact all of our past signs
had a lot of wires in her teeth and that's where Roger comes from right yeah like when we say Roger could
be I was told that that's possible I had thought that it's possible yeah that's the original
usage was that we knew if someone says Roger you know it was on quite on Guadalcanale Murdoch
was in there was was taking a piss and here Japanese come come in they don't know if I
caught sure not is an engineer in one of our interpreters oh you read out a second take I don't
know how you mentioned that yeah you're about it and here oh yeah oh gosh so here's Murdoch
talking about him he gets wounded yeah opposition was very light on the other side of the strip
and when we got down to the end of it we stopped and a Sherman tank came up to help us the tank
had a phone in the back and I was on the phone and I'm trying to tell the guy inside what
what I wanted him to shoot at the big smoke stack in the sugar cane factory I figured a
jab was up there spotting for artillery which was very accurate then all of a sudden boom
shell started falling all around the tank and I knew the spotter in the smoke stop was telling
his guns to fire at us so I ordered the tank commander get that smoke stack then I put the phone
back on and I'm running back to the safety in a hole and that's when I got hit by shrapnel in the
left leg in the right elbow so I'm sitting there and the corpsman comes over and starts bandaging
my arm and I look down and I'm down and my pants are all wet and I said holy shit I piss my
pants and the corpsman said that's not pissed that's blood that's my found out I'd been hitting
the leg so I dropped my pants and my drawers and now the corpsman's bandaging up my lead
leg and the jab start to shell us again so I jumped and ran to a nearby hole which wasn't
easy you know because my pants and my drawers were down around my ankles and so because I haven't
read the entire book you know you talk about Murdoch and I've mentioned that he was a character
and you know obviously you mentioned that he liked drink and one of the people he was in
alcoholic a lot of time he finally got over yeah well one of the people that I would say what's
that word aided him in being an alcoholic and somebody he apparently become a good friends with
because it was a Catholic was the Catholic priest father Jo Keehan so they were really good friends
and they spent a lot of time together and so as as he's starting to move towards being leaving the
area there's a guy John's executive John's exo Jim Westman appeared on the scene and told and
John told Westman to take over. He's a Westy congratulations you just made company commander I'm getting
out of here now Westman got hit by the same arterial that I almost got hit almost got
covered with and he he was out of the service after that he got badly wounded. Wow and we
got 50 casualties in Westman was one of I was so so this is Murdoch continuing how it goes from him
so I head down for the beach looking for the evacuation team I wasn't bleeding all that badly
but I was a mess I could walk sure and I walked I was looking for one particular doctor
soul cassal a dentist early your I had seen him on the beach there now I found him and I said
solos this is fun he's a sound and my friend a ticket please because you couldn't get evacuated
without a ticket they had to put a ticket on you he looked me over my right hand wasn't any good I
couldn't use it so solomon ticketed me a little while later I was evacuated in a small boat
and I said to the navy kid who is driving get hey find me a p.a. 51 will you and he said sure
we found the ship and by then I was lying down and the guys on the deck called down to me
will pick you up in a boom on a stretcher and I came up in the basket and I'm all dirty and
bloody and I see our chaplain father Jo Keehan who I'd become very friendly with so when they took
me out of the basket and put me on the stretcher on the deck I closed my eyes and attended I was dead
father Jo Keehan over and started giving me my last bite in the church last right of the church in
Latin but I can't keep a straight face so I opened my eyes and smiled at him and he goes you son of a
bitch he goes right from speaking lap Latin to calling me a son of a bitch then he took me down to the
infirmary and they patched me up a bit then he took me to his state room and put me in his bed I
must have slept all day and all night I didn't hear a thing I wasn't feeling any pain my night my
right hand and arm will numb when I came to I didn't know where I was at first then I took a shower
changed the bandages and got cleaned up that was the end of my war there my second day on side
pan my right arm was no good really my hand even today is no good yeah here's the thing even
after it's many quite a snoop there's this summer be done
it was a million dollar room I don't have any feeling the right side of my hand the nervous
cutters are million dollar room really because my thumb and two fingers are good still good
and the next the last finger the little finger we're dead so I thought that was about as good
of a story as I've ever heard oh character you know you know when he what happened to him there
when he walked barred into this hotel window and he was drunk as drunk as I'll get out of
course well anyway the retain commander talked to him then next day about it and he says you know
you should be more like an officer you shouldn't be doing that then he went on to say then
the retain commander says well why don't we'll mind and say so I'm kind of like that myself
you got a whole story about him in the whole one this same retain commander he was killed on
Bogumville as he landed they call them they called him well he he took over the one of the
what he called it one of the the Chinese way column yeah name right there in name form like the
equivalent of the of the in in England the equivalent of it and what I don't know I don't know
was an important you know that kind of like the like the uh recoluses but no no no no no no no no no no
there be unit that would be the ones that just like you a seal say a raider a raider he took over the
raider battalion that landed on Bogumville okay and he was killed there and then his his comments
were as he died so well it's been a short war for me well well you there's actually another another one
of these big situations that happens where there's a battle at sea oh yeah Philpincy yeah
and Maryana's turkey shoot yeah you know that it's coming you'd see this before and he said
we were right a few days later we learned that a great battle had indeed been fought in the waters off
west of siphon something in the decisive victory for the US yeah well yeah with their defeat in the
battle of the Philpincy the Japanese lost all hope of re-releaving their forces on siphon now was up to
us the marines knee army to win the land battle do we call do I call it the mariana's turkey shoot
yeah I did right there okay I don't think you've used those words well okay that's that's
traditionally what it's called yeah that is that's the same one now that's the reason that this guy
he held on because he thought the navy could come back and take it back now because he surrendered
even after the war he was not promoted to major in a terrible and and the other thing was even
the other other officer that I visited the same time that had fired at us from business artillery
in Guadalcanel named by name a tannihaki otannih he bad mouth is this guy says well he should have
even committed here he's even now he's a third side he's gonna be even he's still yeah oh yeah
now you guys are kind of pressing through the rest of the island you say here my mortar
section was always about 200 yards behind our lead elements and outbreak of small arms
firing front of us was a single stop and set up our weapons you see now in the in that
that movie about Pacific now you mean the the series the Pacific series yeah here here they had a
six-million meter per his right up in the front and I don't know why the advisor does hey you don't do
that yeah it doesn't make any sense and also all script is all screwed up it was all about a guy
that was going through a going through some kind of a psychological thing and hurry's talking he's talking
to the the kernel in charge of the of the of the of the hospital that he's at you know that
you're talking to the carman you know stuff like that yeah well Hollywood they don't always
terrible because you know they have to in the real world everything goes spread out so you
know that they take a picture so they they they take a picture some real concentrating you see
it's not like that at all yeah still one of my favorite uh war movies the Pacific yeah
what did you think of it well this this sets for incredible they were incredible I
I like friends this I I've been to Palo and good wonderful wonderful wonderful set yeah the
and let's see what was it there what was the other place they were they did Guadalcanale
so one Guadalcanale yeah well all the landings were they were great yeah they were great
was that one I was you know yeah that what I thought I did it cover each size those two
okay I'm thinking primarily I wanted Palo to like yes yeah yeah yeah I just the first time I ever
watched it I was riding on a airplane I had it on my computer I had a headphone's in I was watching
it really close and I I thought that the tone of the script is horrible oh the script might be
horrible out the combat scenes for me they were unbelievable unbelievable the any actually
we have your book I was I was saying while they did a great job because one thing that I
was said to myself you know it's you know when some of the fire fights the night fire fights
it's just flashes and they're like oh yeah that's what it's like there you go and you capture
it in your book you can't really tell what's going on but it's bad yeah and they did a great job
of capturing that hopefully this nail die who we'll pick up on this yeah you'll see the potential there
hopefully you will see
so now you guys are as you guys are pushing through you say casualties overall were relatively light
yes they were at that time well thing is you know this ran for almost a month so yeah I
just dragged out but the casualties were kept coming in of course yeah and then you say meanwhile
off to a right in the other side of the mountain the 27th Division had run into a meet grind
of these areas attacking on a plateau a plateau border on its left by a sheer cliff that formed
the east face of the mountain called purple herds yeah and they were held up and so
Alameda Smith he just he got rid of their their general and the army and National Guard troops
they they they they never really got over it that was unfair they shouldn't have done that
well I they did run if some terrible things down there were catching from the flank you know
true bad yeah and here I was up I was up way in and further and I could look down I see what they're up against
here speaking of friendly forces or friendly fire incidents here you were I was resting on one
knee next to a tree holding my carbine upright where you go up plate to the ground when suddenly
wham wham wham three big shells explode over a hundred to five millimeter long-term long-times
long range the shells cannot from Japanese artillery but from a battery of armored tanks didn't
believe that we were that far forward so he did it I found out like the western man told me about it
he's the one that called it in short he and it was horrible oh it was devastating oh my
guys so so many guys were just pulverized we didn't know what it hit us most of us did not hear the
shells coming no one's out of nowhere no one ducked for cover no one of the shells burst in the
tree above me deflecting the force of the blast and most of the strappin' outwards and set a
straight down that's my life a single piece of metal pierced my elbow the wound whose larger than
a bullet hole about an ancient dinammer at hurt like hell but it didn't look serious it hardly
blood and the bone didn't seem damaged it's still the wound needed treatment a few minutes later
several hospital jeeps converged on the scene and I talked over one of them on the way just 50 yards
from me I passed a large creator containing the remains of several men from weapons platoon who
been playing blackjack when the shell hit their position they'd little bit literally been blown
to bits several of those men had been my friends in Samoa I'd served in their unit before
being commissioned I could identify only one of them and because he was glasses yeah yeah
a few of the name was costinson a fact I have a picture of him too somewhere here
a few yards further on a dead marine lay in a hole beneath a coral outcropping where I had
spent the previous night he'd been killed by the army's misdirected salvo the same shell
the killer yeah you want yeah the same shell that killed the blackjack players wound a dick
stine then a member of weapons platoon he doesn't remember the explosion or anything else about
the day one moment I'm standing on the ground with the guys in the weapons platoon and the next
thing and I know I'm waking up in a tent there in the fuel hospital and it's around midnight
just a concussion in this case he just how long am I here so he just takes off
he's could still be alive I think he's he's in a rest of now I think
all in all the shells from the 150s fives killed or wounded more than 50 marines
yeah yeah yeah now the fellow wrote the wrote a book we came to win or we are be killed or
did die and he got hit he retired as a Colonel by the way and anyway he got hit by the same
same rounds and then put him out he got he got medical medical discipline uh retirement
devasting no no no no no that he had one of his pretty close to friends
turns out he was my company commander at at this particular time and uh the cell server they
was cell server he'd been a professional dancer and he got he got hit by by a large round
on on on on uh tenion and then I then I took over took over I was at exact took over and
he went he went to the hospital in Guadalcanal he killed himself because he did want to live
without a one leg because he's professional dancer and I know I don't think that this fellow wrote
the book realized he he he writes in the book he was the spun it he didn't rent he didn't never
mention he killed himself I talked to the guy that wrote the book he didn't really know one
yet others well he did I know what a coincidence I dated a gal one time she was a she was a
receptionist for William Morris agency and they they represent a lot of the big people
then it turned around all of those well anyway uh she uh I was invited to their Christmas party
and this was in 44 William Morris agency and as they came in she told me who was so on
money will be and so on is he all came in and then I ended up a day to do a couple of times and one time
uh we were in this uh this big place well no place can't think of name now but anyway
others had just returned it's about a month after I had from from Memorionis and I said how did
he how did son son make out and they said oh you didn't know he killed himself my girlfriend
says I knew that we were close fans of his family we used to play brist together
and a small world that's crazy yeah that's crazy yeah so at this point you're wounded yeah yeah
and you go back to the aid station yeah and then late on the 7th of July my 3rd day in the
field hospital doctors and corpsman went through the words towards telling all the walking
to remember to the units because we had to lock up and they were about to the Japanese
and the guns I had to have a still thousands of their hiding ready ready to kill themselves
or make one last bunch of charge and her I had walked right through her 40 were killed
that that that the last night of the mop up can you imagine and then this guy
he was in these were his men and when I I found out his track his track and my track
crossed okay I found out on that and so when I once stood I wanted to talk to him sure enough
she's yeah I was there some reason I wasn't saying bonds on all that no that was another guy
so here and then then he and then then the guy wrote a book about him I have the copy of the book
it's called the last the last samurai by by Jones and I helped I helped the reviewer of the book
before he published it well so uh ended up uh he was invited by the author to attend our reunion in Florida
and when he came he and his wife came and some of our guys treated him materially they could not
believe this guy could have done what he did as far as given him such a bad time being up there
right up until after the war and I tried to I tried to call things down and I had to hit
the time there's an article there's an article look at this article I hear tell the about it
look at this article think I have it in here I think no I guess I don't have it here I never think
yeah here's article I know oh I guess I don't have the way man no that's not yet he's a darn it
by the way here's a picture this guy I showed you that there's a picture this guy that I'm
interviewing this is the other guy that fired his known as pistol peat he's one that did
most of the shooting at us at 105 long range rifle yeah for him and two and one was on
Guadalcanale we we went to it that's I have a picture in my book with him standing at it and
he became a major his his father had been a general in at a kind of like our like west point
but for senior officers to come to and one of these officers was the prince he was a
tenant general became a lieutenant general and he was one of the one standing on a Missouri
at this room that was the one of his students his father's students amazing huh yeah
and by the way this is what the bonds are look like here you see that here we're we buried those bodies
we dragged them into the ditch and we buried probably 4,000 bodies like that
well and now they're homes all through here yeah for so they're still there they're still
they're only about four feet down and then then there's then there's a beautiful new hotels right
on the beach just across the road from that and you were probably told about that when you were
there I don't know it's a place called place called tannipay I don't know tannipay and also
place called sandrokey yeah so for people that are just listening these are just images of
this this massive attack it happened was we we fired in our live in three is our tour
we fired in at them as they were charging and so their bodies are all chuda all chuda
you go into some pretty good detail about the about that bonds I had to talk about this
about the age band and radio that is a best you'll find anywhere and in fact
that's where you know I had to reveal it in detail because I had some doubt about it and I said
well it looks like in general he's okay he's he's said it right there's nobody else can talk about
it's in that detail don't but he can then oh it's a great idea oh first hand yeah
now I did go to a reunion of those people in that battalion back in Iowa and so this guy was
there and he was one of the ones that the interview of course for this yeah and then yeah so
if you want to do some account of just incredible fortitude you got to read this book and
then it picks up where you what you were just talking about this is when you go now to do sort of the
sort of a cleanup and you see this many of the bodies were recognizable yeah and
one of the guys Sandy and the others had to reach the bloody remains for dog tags that would
identify their friends discovering which one of their friends they were charging and hunger
if I own people were killed most of them soldiers they went right through them you say that this
bonsai this bonsai resulted in as near as I can determine from what I saw and what I've read
the Japanese lost upward of 4,000 men some 500 Americans were killed most of them from the army
the two battalions that were overrun and nearly wiped out each battery suffered 150 two
casualties in the attack 75 killed or 6 wounded they got completely your run
it's estimated that some 600 Japanese were killed on the open ground directly in front of the
batteries guns yeah yeah man you're you were pushing up again this is another another thing
that you passed through we passed through their positions and deployed to skirmish lines
extending the water's edge in the railroad tracks of 6 buildings advancing along the
along the shore in the eighth of longer road yeah thus a raid we picked our way
slowly through the battle zone our weapons at the ready all around the dead were thick on the
ground in numbers that defied comprehension bodies and pieces of bodies everywhere artillery
and pounded the area and chopped up the bodies turning the battlefield into an immense open air
abitwar strewn with torsos and limbs and heads and chunks of unadunifiable flesh burned black
by fire I could recreate the flow I could recreate the flow and ferocity the battle the
patterns of the fight and flight by the numbers and positioning of the dead there would be places
pockets of resistance where bodies were pile on top of bodies dead Japanese entangled with
that americans frozen in attitudes of hand to hand combat clutching each other plunging
bay nets into each other locked in their death struggles arm machine gun positions were
tabloids of butchery with bodies of the Japanese heaped in front of positions and bodies of
american soldiers slumped over their guns for men who didn't want to be there the US army soldiers
they were a lot of drafts and all of a bunch of drafts here too yeah not all the Japanese were
dead of course as usual some were shaming yeah we knew this would be the case and we very quickly
and we're very quick on our triggers if we saw any movement if one of those bodies so much
is twitch we poor fire we'd poor fire into it even if we didn't see movement if a body or group
of bodies looks suspicious we shot it through and through bushes big enough to provide concealment
were preemptively blasted into wood chips and leaf bits now and then as we advance across the
battlefield the dead body rose suddenly to throw a grenade or shoot it us some Japanese jumped
to their feet and tried to run away we shot them all just shot them all right down no prisoners
were taken we moved forward at a steady pace hardly breaking a stride rarely halting we just kept
walking through the killing ground looking around scrutinizing the bodies firing at the Japanese
are coming to a probably under dead probably at least a hundred and we we we we had only
a couple of wounded as well we had that process yeah that was a large of stuff the war
that was what that was a large of sponsi counter attack of the war see if they were given
no objective to just keep going keep going it gives many of us as possible until they're
in the end of the house lost their life and and the two two commanders they they
committed very carry before started and one was the one the gumo was the one the lead to attack
on Pearl Harbor now gumo and then we finally get to the last campaign a little a little
over three miles south of siphon sent tinian twelve miles long six miles across it's widest point
and this was your oh this is really something too that first night
one eight landed late that afternoon yeah the second division unit involved the only the only
second division unit involved the jday operations the regiment quickly established a reserve
position behind the beach has perimeter digging in and string barbed wire and anticipation
of enemy counter attack all moving around the perimeter. All of it's 200 miles 200 to 100 foot
to 200 yards wide beach they had no idea they were going to be up there they thought we
got land down down there the main town which was called a well-known called san Jose
you guys fainted you could there's a fake we did a fake but we had a battle shed hip hit
it was a lot of damage and lost lies from counter counter fire counter battery fire.
This was for me and many other second division marines the fourth combat operation in just 18
months the three previous guadal canal tarua and siphon had all been difficult each in its own way
taking enormous physical and emotional toll on all the survivors most of us have been wounded at
least once all of us have been sick. Now somewhere we're you're going to get to the point where
we had to at night go over and head off the Japanese that we're attacking our artillery and
they're we're you know you don't know and I'll tell you about it if you don't see yeah yeah
the thing that's interesting about this is I mean just you guys having been through
everything that you'd been through at this point I mean the mentality going into this you know
you say here the air force could have dropped bushels of purple hearts on our front line units
and every marine who grabbed on what had deserved it. Okay now they're talking the
napal was dropped the first time to war on on tinian probably before we landed.
Yeah you said you said then the aircraft used napal bombs something you do us we
watching amazement as the bombs fell earth were tumbling and over and an exploded on a ridge
that instantly erupted in flames and oily smoke along its entire length about 10 seconds later
gust of hot air from the ledge blew us over. Next day first batiny elements moved up on the
ridge and poked around the scorched landscape most of the undergrowth had been burned away.
The ground was black and reaped of gasoline and the foxholes were filled with the corpses of
Japanese soldiers blackened and shriveled by the incinerating fires. Yeah first use in napal?
What was the other section that you were talking about? Okay right I'll tell you in the
day the island of secure. August 2nd here I'm a company commander. We reached the next the last
bit the beach you know looking down over the cliff and when that one we returned there when
they're in March of this year we looked from the south side of that beach where the civilians
all jumped and killed themselves and looked up across and my company was spread from about halfway
up to clear to that point and we had we had we had both go out with a bullhorn to form the surrender
and gave them all the made of they didn't so then we fired them machine guns and martyrs at them
and they all jumped off off the point this side of it and hunters jumped off their des.
And then that night we were spread out so long so so thinly we decided I'll talk to my
my company exactly that time and what's we do at long and so you're just going to have to have
strong points figure where they're likely to come through. So we did and we looked out they tried to
come through right a strong point so we'll let but anyway these the then we had to send people down
and try to get them out of the caves down below us there are a lot of civilians in there.
So were the civilians out where they were they staying with the with the with the with the
no they're by themselves families. Yeah the were families one not to run there they're
even the same cave some soldiers were them yeah yeah and eventually you could say here the
Japanese I mean and again this we're jumping through all kinds of you know just crazy combat
and then you get to a point where the Japanese had no no more fight left of them they were ready to die
if not yet call it quits for the most part they went on. Okay then what happened you see when
I when I told you right after we landed the first night and here we got here we got we got
we got got a message that our artillery was being being overrun by our other Japanese and so we
had here's that for dark and probably around midnight and here we here as a tiny I was a
company exact and I took up 200 or maybe two Patoons and we went single file to former sliders
from the front of the artillery well that's great dangers because anybody walking around is
going to get going to get the enemy you know right well then I went when morning came here there were
all kinds of shovels out there and there was Japanese and here we had the our line of scrimmers
had to go forward oh this is going to be horrible the air in fox though they're in holes and we're
not not a lawnmower shot at us as we came up very close with an less than 100 feet or so I
just put a hand grenade shoot kill themselves bang bang 100 and kill themselves as we walk forward
and we only had a couple of men wounded so we had and why they didn't shoot back I don't understand
we're in all of them were given orders not to thank you in the air hurry wow
what a relief what a relief so going back to the book here and again I'm jumping through
some incredible stories but Tinian was declared secure on one August first Patan pulled back
about a mile from the coast and set up camp the end of the fighting was very abrupt suddenly we didn't
have anything to do there was no enemy activity in the immediate area no danger no shooting I just
sat back and tried to enjoy the situation that this wasn't as easy as you might think I was exhausted
and filled with a lingering dread a sense that I'd used up all my lives I had I had been
become conditioned to wondering whether I was going to survive another day and then all of a sudden
all the causes for concern had vanished as though I had been given a reprieve from a death sentence
I could hardly believe it a strange feeling I didn't have long to dwell on it a few days later
I received orders to return to the states 32 months after leaving San Diego I was going home
three weeks later at Pearl Harbor where I'd been marking time in the transit center I'd
boarded a giant Martin Mars flying boat for the final leg of the flight that was oh my gosh
well landed in Patan when he called that place I can't think we're now in Berkeley
what is it like? Alameda Alameda Alameda Alameda Naval Air Station
everyone on board service men from every branch returning home watching outer silence as the golden
gate bridge passed beneath I reported to a marine facility was granted 32 day furlough one for every month of
overseas duty later that day I visited a barber shop while I was sitting in the chair one of the
patrons began bitching about the terrible state of things in the country I listened to him for a while
and then I exploded you don't know what terrible is I told him he shut up after that
you know talk about the woman ran to the what the woman ran into oh yeah yeah yeah yeah
yes the best I picked up that was your first time in the female marine yeah yeah and you know
because they brought the women in now they could form a six division but taking all them in
they had clerical type of work take them out put them in combat right this is the thing that's crazy
for me to think about here is you know you just have one line it says the war wasn't over right
and this is 1944 the war wasn't over and as you talked about earlier the thought was that
you know America was gonna have to invade every island until you got right into Tokyo and since you
had seen the the how how steadfast the Japanese were you all just thought yeah I might be home for
year but I'll be back over there as a as a battalion executive officer and a battalion officer or
whatever you know all my friends that came back and they they ended back up
keeping preparing preparing for that so about a year you spend at Kwanico at the basics school
teaching the young marine that and and the first what called PCS tuned commander school
I went through the first as a captain and then I went through orientation crashed
because I became an instructor you see okay so they sent you through a school
they sent you to a commander even though you'd already been a company commander in combat yeah yeah yeah
so anyway I don't know the academics of it basically and well and then now it's a
commander then the next I'm a commander the at the basic school and here I have a
battalion of a second of tennis just recent graduates in naval academy and a battalion senior
NCOs and none of them wanted to continue they just wanted to retire at their rank you know
you're going to be back to a second lieutenant and I never forget when the first things I had to do
was keep my little extra on formal guard mouth and I never been the formal guard and I told them
I told these guys I said I never I've been a combat almost as time and I've been a formal guard mouth
since I I had a felt presentation to move it felled around you know they didn't give me a bad
time they'd all they'd all been through it you know but I never never had been through it you know
and I told them major about it and said he told me said you figured out you figured out
no
here we go on August 15th after night of devastating bonding raids bombing raids on eight
Japanese cities the Japanese announced their intention for surrender yeah
for Americans and most of the and this is after obviously the bomb yeah you know
um for Americans and the rest of the world the announcement signaled the end of World War two
even though the formal surrender didn't take place until the second second of September
a few weeks later our classes were terminated in orders were cut by thousands to release
men from active duty I was asked whether I wanted to stay on and take a regular commission in
the Marine Corps I was tempted I'd started as a private made it all the way up to Captain at age
24 no small achievement and then was the potential for further advancement in the postwar corps
at first I said yes and signed my the requisite papers but after sleeping on I changed my mind
the next day I would do my papers shortly thereafter I was released from active duty
I bought a 1940 crisis or convertible yeah and an octobre hydrovocross country to spook a
yeah yeah five day journey yeah and then then I went to work at the H1th of college
I went to work for North American aviation and there was there for six years
and then lucky there was there for 23 years and I was on primarily on the exploration space you
know I was involved with the first the first flights to Mars and the first fly by
it was a failure we provided the vehicle that did the injection took it to it and it was going to
as it flow by and then take pictures of it's blue by and also provided the shroud that protected it
get now the atmosphere well the shroud outcast and blew up and here I had to take a technician
down to JPL who would provide the spacecraft and and then then that had to take down a half was
shroud and they put it in temperature out of two chamber it did blow up and I had to go back and tell
our engineering people hey it did blow up and this all no it couldn't there's just they just
convinced you did no it did blow up so then we had to work like the next the next launch
next launch window was just matter a couple months later so we built a different kind of
different construction and it made it from then on I was involved and all kinds of involved
with with the with the tech pictures of the moon where they uh Boeing provided space
to get we provided the means of getting there and then astronauts when they prepared to land
the moon will they their practice meeting with our spacecraft that kind of stuff yeah and one time
one time and then I became the I became the president of the management association about 3000
members and one time we had we had uh put this name uh the first on the moon um Armstrong Neil Armstrong
he spoke to us and I asked him a question we had about seven hundred people in our tennis
and he asked him a question and says sometimes you look up there at nighttime and he has to kind
of pinch yourself I was really there can you imagine can you imagine what his answer was
I have no idea his answer was I've learned to live with it
and just brought down the house oh she and then what you when did you get married when you have kids
uh that was in uh just a minute 40 47 yeah and uh I mean this this book is just like I said
I've read a fraction of it probably read less than 10% of it tonight the the amount of
information the amount of detail the stories are just okay now this is unbelievable this is
when you get that one and it's entirely different this is based on interviews by a very
and this is based on some talking to people but mostly I'm talking to the natives I'm talking
to Japanese uh I'm describing what what it's like now what the landscape is like all in the
pre-lying around so it's almost like this book should have been written first and should have been written second
well I don't know you see see the thing is this is too broad or is this is getting
not detailed and detailed with the people yeah and that's mentioned in in the in the
in the prologue or the forward in the forward in the forward that's where it's mentioned that's
reason it's a different entirely different and I didn't even tend to write this but uh you got
you know here hit all of these all these tapes and now only that and a little little little
tape recorder and the one's Japanese are in two acute and he was doing the same thing so
anything I said he was recording or I'm saying so on and so that's when it said okay that was
82 then 85 183 a tickle group out as a tour guide then 85 I went I went to japan went on
space A and so here I entered you and that was that was really interesting I'll tell you this guy
this guy Tani he told me all or the space we've had yassikuni shrine and the you know the
in person if he had less than all that kind of stuff and just a lot and then went into a
a TV studio and all that kind of stuff is incredible and any any point or doubt you know
I think it was so fire bomb you know it all this is all new all new but then everyone is so friendly
to me you know just couldn't believe it yeah then he built he built a he built a you know a battleship
that was the Japanese battleship that had it's shilled Guadalcanale he made it and it would
it was radio controlled and it would fly even it would fire from the guns with a photo flash flash out
and he had in his garage and his eight foot long is the same size is the actual drawings of the
of the battleship so he made it the same size okay and now he he came down with cancer
and we we of course one with a 15 years and so then he wanted to hear he had the same what should
I do it said well you know there's there's the museum back in Kalamazoo
Guadalcanale battles and he did he sent it back there and send a museum now
oh wow yeah I have a picture of him in my book here summer
well and then here have a lot of that a lot of little cartoons he drew I'd say what happened here
and so he drew out he drew it out this is this is what happened or he'd send me something about here
here he is just starving there and now here he's dreaming of a meal that later on he will
had stuff like that it's just incredible well this stuff is is amazing these these this
book is like I said this book is awesome thanks to my co-author he know he know how to craft it
all I did was hey yeah this is correct yeah yeah oh well there's more of this there's a little
more here and there's not the main the main was on site pan I just I had some doubts because
he had he did believe in some conspiracy theories about other things that's reason I was concerned
but overall it was okay it was good well it's like I said it's an incredible book to read I
know I've had you here for just about four hours talking but I wanted to I wanted to kind of close
it out with one last thing one last section of the book and you already kind of mentioned it a
little bit but the way it's written is just just such a fitting close to this is not the guy
that's the life yeah and so it says this on October on on 22 November 1993 the 50th anniversary
of the bout for Taroa I tended this ceremony in yorkers New York to be dedicate here you go
Anthony O'Boyle Memorial Park in the name of the fallen private from my pontoon he was well known
there in that town also attending where Anthony's good friends and foxhole buddies yeah
Bill Crumpacker said it right yeah he was with a dickstein yeah our company commander John Merck
and several other Taroa vet as well as a member as a number of high-ranking Marines
including Lieutenant John General John J. She hand he bought a herd of a man Jeff yeah
then a member of the joint chiefs of staff yeah it was a cold gray day with an icy wind blowing
off the Hudson River yeah quite a contrast to the tropical heat and brilliant sunlight on
Bezier when Anthony had medicine and yeah shot in the head while peering over the sea wall
and red beach too Anthony had fallen back into John Murdoch's arms still alive but unconscious
his body twitching his eyes open but empty John held him for a brief time spoke to him
and then set him aside on the beach among the bodies of other slain Marines where he died a
few minutes later all the solemn knees appropriate to the occasion where observed all the
rights were performed the colors were trouped speeches were giving music was played prayers were offered
we saying the national anthem the Marine him and amazing grace there was a presentation of
military testimonials proclamations were made John Murdoch gave a talk about Anthony
then presented Anthony's brother with the purple heart a fitting gesture from a man who comforted
Anthony in his final moments of his life and honor guard fired at 21 gun salute
taps was played we all wept our tears were shed in both sorrow and joy
there was cause for both Anthony's life had been short his dying heart his glory
everlasting there was no bitterness no disillusionment no anger his life had mattered
his death also and we remembered both and knew that both had meaning and purpose the biographical
sketch in the program for the ceremony expressed the feelings well in this regard
and serves as a fitting epitaph for every marine in the second world war
and here's what it read if the world had been different if he had been born at another time
Anthony with his sunshine smile could have married raised a family had grandchildren
and lived a quiet typically traditional American life but the early 1940s were not normal times
a fascist dictator threatened to conquer Europe and forge an alliance with the militarists
who controlled the Japanese government and they're distorted plan for world domination
and unprepared and unsuspecting United States became a primary target the American people were
shocked in the action by the Sunday morning arrival of Japanese bombers over a wahoo
like hundreds of thousands of other young Americans Anthony felt compelled to volunteer
to serve his country he simply could not stand aside while America was under attack
Anthony gave his life on tarua for his country his core and for his fellow Marines
he was not a famous hero more than a by millions extolled in the press
immortalized in magazine articles or books he was no one special just another marine private first class
the American people should thank god eternally for Anthony and his fellow Marines soldiers
see men and airmen who preserved and won a magnificent victory over a wickedly evil enemy
semper five brother you are not forgotten and with that Dean Lad has left the building
and actually who has joined us in the building looks like Jason Gargert, Jason Gargert's randomly
we are in spokane Washington spokane spokane spokane and since you originally linked me up with
the Dean Lad on a few random flights somewhere and you saw what was he just wearing like a
Marine Corps hat sure is one of the Marine Corps hats sitting there and I struck up a conversation
with them and the next thing you know he's like oh I was like wow what can I tell you
taro up and I was like holy cow and he goes out and wrote a book about it you don't have to be kidding me
it was awesome just so funny you text from the flight yeah and that you get so funny because
you and I were just standing out there talking to him you know how you get you know you and I are
used to hear in all of our friends say like oh well now it was in Baghdad or when I was in Marsha
or when I was in wherever I was in Ramadi and we were just standing out there and he's like
well you know when I was in side pan I was like that's so much better so much cooler than we are
dang it and that is the most ridiculous what those guys went through is completely ridiculous
and I know I mean I've since you know with the old breed is kind of the the the the way that I learned
like what those guys went through sledge Eugene sledge but this book is just right out right
there with it man it's right there with it and you're just getting gut shot while you're 500
meters from the beach at tarua yep you there's no way you're gonna live and yet you live and then
and then guess what you go to Hawaii for six months and then you're hitting the beaches of
side pan and then you barely survive that and then guess what you're hitting the beaches of
tinian and by the way all of this is after you were at the wild canal crazy it's completely insane
and by the way when he got back he got back in 40 August of 44 when he gets back he has like 32 days
leave one day for every month that he was overseas and then he's like none of those guys thought
the war was gonna end they just got done literally killing every single Japanese except for 17 on an
island they all fought to the death and then they think okay there's however many millions left in
Japan yeah we're gonna have to go kill them all we're gonna have to kill every single one of those people
that's what they were thinking so he was thinking cool I'm gonna be on short duty back here training
Marines for a year and then I'll be going back overseas as a as a company commander or as a
battalion X or whatever totally nuts they came up with a bomb that grew in to perfectly good
war is what I heard some of you say on this podcast yeah yeah that was that was Jim Kunkill said that
good so anyways it's it's so awesome that first of all that you manage awesome that I mean it's
it's just amazing to be able to sit here and talk to these guys and one of the reasons that we're
able to do this is because of the support that is given to us from you the listener
sure and what we've tried to do is set something up where you can support not only this podcast so
that we can continue to go around and talk to the Dean Lads of the world and capture their story
but also while you're doing that you can support yourself yes while you're on the path
it's a mutually supporting scenario yes which is a good thing so on the path what's the the first
thing that comes to mind obviously in my opinion due to so many due to just so many you need to get you get
and urgent or a genie yeah 100% that was a common question when we started this hey I'm starting
due to just a good of course that's good what you should I get common question easy no answer
easy no or if it wasn't for that question we wouldn't even be connected to or it was that question
and me telling people to buy originies even though I didn't wasn't connected with them yet
yeah so that's pretty cool to think about so please relax regards yeah I'll just
be wearing your legs right now by the way like right now some American denim origin jeans what
are you two Jason Gardner oh we're three right here oh yeah every time I wash them they get better
they get better they're so nice and you know what is coming out right now the Delta 68 jeans
which are named after the may-con Delta which is where our forefathers served in Vietnam
and where our forefathers in the SEAL teams wore blue jeans because they were tougher and way cooler
so they're like lightweight though so anyways jeans you can get those there to your t-shirts
sweatshirts supplements yes keep you on on your game and on the path big time
mock extra protein in the form of of a desert joint warfare is it the dirt in the form of extra protein
to get some kind of a desert the form of a check actually I utilized that combo the other night
it was like it was straight here's the thing I had some pumpkin pie with it though I don't think
a pumpkin pie that a violation yeah it was a desert for the pumpkin pie it's like a desert for
the desert so many asked me if we're gonna make pumpkin spice uh milk what like seasonal or seasonal
even if it's wrong no man do it because that reminds me of pumpkin spice latte which I
know is like a thing for people with like weird hipsters yeah hipsters hey man still are you
a pumpkin you're giving me a look over there no I was just thinking about you know as long as there's
enough fat with what you're eating that dessert it's gonna blunt your insulin response so you
okay fire it up do you think I'm gonna come out of this guy come out of the bank critical of my
bio chemistry here all right cool man thank you I'm gonna talk to you more about that if you want
to drink something uh for some energy we'll call it sure yeah if you want to drink some you can try
some discipline some discipline go some discipline powder and right now I'm completely on this kick of
the jockel pomer which is the best thing I've ever been so the discipline go you know the
energy drink the cans is that discipline go or just go it's like discipline it's as disciplined
in small but it's go I guess so it's discipline go but it's the energy this is where some big
marketing machine it's gonna be like hey need to rethink your marketing plan because it's like no
I'm kind of care and I seem channeling a BTFD I'm a marketing advisor is Tony yeah yeah
makes this like no either way that in the form of energy drink those I've been on I've been like
so I don't want to say addicted I'm not gonna use that word for you but my wife the other
day goes in hey darling how many is too many of those things to drink the day and I'm like probably
four she's like oh okay and I'm like how many you've been drinking a day and she goes well at least
three every day she let it know meets the threshold hey yeah join warfare don't forget about that
get a loyal that'll keep you in the game big team all queer are to oh and then warrior kid milk
for the little kids so instead of feeding your kid actual poison yeah actual poison
which is what uh normal chocolate milk and strawberry milk is it's poison for your child
you might as well as give them strict nine is that what it's like yeah just give them just give them
straight yeah yeah well okay all right so get the warrior kid get some get some tea to winters coming
get that little little chocolate white that don't get some there it is this is all at
origin main dot com also when you get faithful warriors I got it on the website
I'm not worries it under books from the episode I think I'm gonna list the other books as well
that he sort of mentioned okay yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
I'm about to alter all making attempt faithful warriors 100% will be there um you know so you
can get that good support on now and also we have a store chocolate store actually we it's all
it's everyone's store now pretty good it's gonna change the name to everyone's store maybe
maybe I'm gonna have a little bit of Tony he might let me just go communist on it call the people
store maybe it would fit is what I'm saying anyway it's called jockel store currently jockel
store dot com this is where you can get more rashguards more how should i say representative
directly of the game the path more of the funny we just took it for granted we talked about
origin we didn't say that it was made in america after we just talked for four hours with
someone that fought to keep america free and then we didn't mention the fact that everything
in origin is made 100% without compromise in the United States of america yeah that's pretty cool
just a cotton is grown see yes and that's the part two like you can say yeah 100% made
had to call these materials and I made them right here in america 100% which isn't even bad
I'm not even hating on that it's good but we're just like wait wait wait what about the materials though
you know okay okay I get it man okay all good either way but what about those materials
you know or the origin materials that's that's grown in america so jockel store
rashgargard rashgargard made in america well from origin so boom in the game trucker's hats
beanies hoodies like and heavy whatever you like well it depends on what you mean
it they're heavy technically but you know you just use 20 minutes from the Canadian board
at a bro you don't have heavy for him you need heavy for him you are right so all
us stuff is at jockel store dot com representative yes also subscribe to the podcast
if you haven't already a contrary to what jockel says I'm not saying you don't
what do you keep saying that you don't think people subscribe to the podcast you need to
tell them no so I can't open door if I remember correctly which I probably don't but if I do
I my initial uh contention was that we don't have to say to subscribe to the podcast we don't have to
say hey subscribe you know what do we have to say that nothing oh I'll just subscribe to this
podcast if I like it kind of thing that I think I don't I think that was the whole contention
nonetheless why is it even there then why are we saying it that's the whole reason I brought it up
at that time it's like why are we even saying this remember but then we did like
sent you a message yes that's how that's described that's right yeah so it's like a good reminder
and then you're like see yeah okay it's all come to see thanks all right so so subscribe to the
podcast if you want to talk about that if there's also some other podcast one of them
is called the Warrior Kid podcast which you may or may not know about it's for children it's for parents
it's for everyone in the world and then we have another podcast oddly enough now
which is called the grounded podcast grounded podcast yes this I guess you was formulated kind of
with the offshoots of conversations about your tattoo in life right yeah well here's the thing
there's some things that we taught that you and I talk about and then that you and I talk about
with everyone that we know yeah that doesn't quite fit in the purview of jocopotcasts actual yeah
right like yes the jocopotcasts is for Dean lad yes it's not for Dean's director
but the Dean has Dean's been on it but like Dean's you know we we we covered the primary
jocopotcast type stuff from him but Dean has other information for us other things that we talk about
that that is the perfect way to put it back so there you go so subscribe to those podcasts and
also if you want to get some some soap because you probably need soap in fact I'm going to go
and say you do need soap get from Irish Oaks Ranch dot com from young aid and who's making soap on
his farm from goats it's not allowed to sell goat milk in California because speaking of communists
they like to control everything out there but you still go to milk soap yes get the milk for
consumption there I know so get some soap and stay clean also we have youtube channel on the
industry to stay in the video version of this podcast we want to see what we look like
even at me maybe jocco actually I know it's not like you know it didn't lad looks like yeah yeah yeah
98 90 years old just in here just more energy and he I wish you to go on like on a full
fitness diet like longevity protocol what's going yeah he's been what's he what's he given me on that
path not to mention it took a round of the guts like I can't be killed bro he's the
he's the ultimate still rolling so yeah and then we got psychological warfare if you need some
little mental spot you can get that it's available on various MP3 platforms me talking to you about
your moment of weakness if you need a visual version that go to flipsidecampus.com a little company
run by Dakota Meyer you can get you can get art sure I said it and then also books
you want to exercise your brain so get this book this book is epic faithful warriors a combat
marine marine marine remembers the Pacific War I like I said I read 10% of it at most on this podcast
I didn't touch there's huge peace that even touching here so order that book
leadership strategy and tactics field manual just got cleared by the DOD so we are clear hot
it's coming out January 14th and you're probably thinking oh well I weighed a little while to order
it and if you think that you're not getting that first the niche and then I will look at you with
shame when I meet you so no seriously uh leadership strategy tactics preorder it now so the
so that the publisher knows how many to print we all know that this has been a problem for some
people in the past being included. We're the warrior kid one two and three order those books immediately
for your children and for every child that you know yeah get them I'm been buying them for the
kids libraries that's also I got the three warrior kids books and Mikey in the dragons brought
it down to the school library here you go the I just realized I gotta go get it for the little
town where libraries too so more kids and just the ones that I know that's awesome and the teachers
have they been reading in school with your kids uh the fifth grade teacher yes because I
I got a bunch of letters from the kids yeah they read it they're in the game they are they have a
pull a banner close now yes you know what that right there my mission in this world has been
accomplished that there's a classroom in America with a pull-up art every classroom in America
because they have a pull-up art and a couple of copies that were good so yeah check out those books
and Mikey in the dragons I don't know a lot of people as I as I always say a lot of people
think that's the best kids book ever written pretty well at least for sure at least I do
discipline goes freedom field manual you can get that book if you want to get after it and what's
interesting about that book is there's no book like it and my publisher I was like is this
the biggest risk you've ever took with published in a book and he's like oh absolutely not even
close there's no book like it it's totally outside of any other normal book so yes this is a big risk
but it it outperformed every model of sales that they had created for it like even though that
well if it really does great it'll be here it I did all that so why word a mouth and you all
spread the word so thank you discipline because freedom field manual and then of course there is
extreme ownership and the dichotomy leadership that I wrote with my brother life babbin about
leadership not just in combat but everywhere and then we have Ashland front which is our leadership
consultancy and what we do is solve problems through leadership worldwide that's what we do go to
Ashland front dot com for details eF online since leadership training can't just be a shot
in the arm and then you're good to go you need to do more persistent training over a longer period of time
that's eF online go to eF online dot com check it out we're doing new modules all the time
sir master 2019 the last master that we are doing in 2019 is in Sydney, Australia we are about to
head down there so every master we've done is sold out if you want to come to the master in Sydney it is a two
day leadership conference instruction seminar that is guaranteed to up your leadership again you will
have pragmatic actionable things to do that are going to make you better leader when you leave and what does
that mean that means you'll do better in everything in your life period and then we have eF overwatch
where we are taking veterans from spec ops and combat aviation and we are placing them into companies
in the civilian sector and be on the lookout for eF Legion where we are taking broad military
troopers and placing them into the civilian sector so they can use those military skills take the
principles that we know from the military that we know from extreme ownership and put them in your
company so your company can win and if you want to continue to interact with us virtually
then you can do it on the inner webs Jason is at Jason dot n dot garden on instagram
yeah Jason Jason and garden twitter yeah i knew there was a difference somewhere in their facebook
Jason and gardener on facebook which one is your most used social media platform
i like twitter the most not excuse me instagram yeah i could cause the graph the grandma's
deal twitter's a bit clunky seeing a root what stuff like that and it's interesting but
alright well if you want to talk to Jason that's him echo is at echo Charles and i am at
jocca willing that's twitter is to grab an on the fuss some book and and once again thanks to
Dean lad lieutenant colonel dean lad you know it's a spring court for his service and
sacrifice and the same obviously goes out to all our service men and women out there
thank you for protecting our freedoms and to our police and law enforcement firefighters paramedics
EMT's dispatchers correctional officers board a patrol secret service all first responders
thanks for what you do every day to keep us safe here in our homes and to everyone else out there
never forget never forget the price that has been paid for our freedom a price of blood and horror
a price of sacrifice and suffering a price that we cannot fully repay but what we can do
is live a life that honors every single sacrifice that has been made for those
that gave their lives go out there and live and until next time this is Jason and echo
when jockel out